#LyX 1.6.5 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 345
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\author "" 
\author "" 
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Peer to Peer and Human Evolution
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\shape italic
On "the P2P relational dynamic" as the premise of the next civilizational
 stage
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Michel Bauwens
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\family typewriter
\size scriptsize
Typeset by John Haltiwanger
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Author: Michel Bauwens, michelsub2003@yahoo.com
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The essay is an emanation of the Foundation for P2P Alternatives, Draft
 1.93, May 21, 2005; it was written after several months of collaboration
 with Remi Sussan.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A weekly newsletter, Pluralities/Integration, monitoring P2P developments
 is also available from the same author, free by email request.
 See the archive at 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://integralvisioning.org/index.php?topic=p2p"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The foundation website-in-progress is at 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://p2pfoundation.net/Main_Page"

\end_inset

 ; a mailing list for the site's development is available at p2pf@yahoogroups.com
 / 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://groups.yahoo.com/group/p2pf/join"

\end_inset

; a mailing list to discuss political strategy is available at strategic_p2p@goo
glegroups.com / 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://groups.google.com.au/group/strategic_p2p "

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Summaries
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A shorter 10-page summary essay is available here, at 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Martien van Steenbergen has summarized the essay's main points in bullet
 format.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Table of Contents
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are two ways to access this manuscript.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
On the left, by clicking on the title, you have access section by section,
 and I recommend this type of access for those who want to leave comments.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
After the title, you have access to the full chapter with endnotes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Table of Contents
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
1.
 Introduction ; Access to Full Chapter, with endnotes: Chapter 1
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
2.
 P2P as the Technological Framework of Cognitive Capitalism; Access to:
 Chapter 2
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
3.
 P2P in the Economic Sphere
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
4.
 P2P in the Political Sphere
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
5.
 "Network Theory" or: The Discovery of P2P principles in the Cosmic Sphere
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
6.
 P2P in the Sphere of Culture and Self
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
7.
 P2P and Social Change
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Appendix 1: Methodology for Research and Interpretation of P2P Theory
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Appendix 2.
 Launch of The Foundation for P2P Alternatives
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Appendix 3: The P2P Meme Map
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Appendix 4: Reactions to the Essay: Kudo's
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
BIBLIOGRAPHY
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Executive Summary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
0.
 Executive Summary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Peer to Peer is mostly known to technologically-oriented people as P2P,
 the decentralized form of putting computers together for different kind
 of cooperative endeavours, such as filesharing and music distribution.
 But this is only a small example of what P2P is: it's in fact a template
 of human relationships, a "relational dynamic" which is springing up throughout
 the social fields.
 The aim of this essay is to describe and explain the emergence of this
 dynamic as it occurs, and to place it in an evolutionary framework of the
 evolution of modes of civilization.
 We emit the hypothesis that it both the necessary infrastructure of the
 current phase of 'cognitive capitalism', but at the same time, significantly
 transcends it thus pointing out the possibility of a new social formation
 that would be based on it in an even more intense manner.
 In section one, you will find an initial definition, an explanation of
 our methodology for research, and some acknowledgements.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
After describing the emergence of P2P as the dominant mode, or 'form', of
 our current technological infrastructure (section two), we then describe
 its emergence in the economic sphere (section three), as a 'third mode
 of production', neither profit-driven nor centrally planned, but as a decentral
ized cooperative way of producing software (free software and open source
 movements), and other immaterial products, based on the free cooperation
 of 'equipotential' participants.
 It uses copyright and intellectual propery rights to transcend the very
 limitations of property, because in free software, if you use it, you have
 to give at least the same rights to those who will use your modified version,
 and in open sources, you have to give them equal access to the source code.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Such commons-based peer production has other important innovations, such
 as it taking place without the intervention of any manufacturer whatsoever.
 In fact the growing importance of 'user innovation communities' (section
 3.1.B), which are starting to surpass the role of corporate sponsored marketing
 and research divisions in their innovation capacities, show that this formula
 is poised for expansion even in the world of material production, provided
 the design phase is separated from the production phase.
 It is already producing major cultural and economic landmarks such as GNU/Linux
, the Wikipedia encyclopedia, the Thinkcycle global cooperative research
 projects, and a Writeable Web/Participative Internet/Global Alternative
 Communications infrastructure that can be used by all, beyond the corporate
 stranglehold on mass media.
 Finally, CBPP exemplifies a new work culture (section 3.1.C), that overturns
 many aspects of the Protestant work ethic as described by Max Weber.
 In the world of development, it is exemplified by the emerging 'edge to
 edge development partnerships' as theorized by Jock Gill.
 In section three, we also discuss the evolution of forms of cooperation
 (3.4.A), and of collective intelligence (3.4.B).
 It is also here that we are starting to address key analytical issues:
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
what are the specific characteristics of the ideal-type of the P2P form
 (3.4.C), namely de-institutionalisation (beyond fixed organizational formats
 and fixed formal rules), de-monopolisation (avoid the emergence of collective
 individuals who monopolise power, such as nation-state and corporation),
 and de-commodification (i.e.
 production for use-value, not exchange value); 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
we then demonstrate that P2P cannot be explained by the gift economy model
 of equal sharing and 'exchange of similar values', but rather by a model
 of communal shareholding (section 3.4.D), i.e.
 the creation of a Commons based on free participation both regarding input,
 and output (free usage even by non-producers).
 We use Alan Page Fiske's fourfold model of intersubjective relationships
 to ground this comparison; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
we pay attention to the current power structure of cognitive capitalism,
 with a discussion of the thesis of McKenzie Wark's Hacker's Manifesto (section
 3.4.E.).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We then turn to its political manifestations, and describe how P2P is emerging
 as a new form of political organisation and sensibility, already exemplified
 in the workings of the alterglobalisation movement (section 4.1.A.) which
 is a network of networks that refuses the principle of 'representation',
 i.e.
 that someone else can represent your interests.
 In France,the recent social movements since 1995 were led by "Coordinations"
 exemplifying exactly this sort of practice (section 4.1.B).
 Thus the birth of new political conceptions such as those of 'absolute
 democracy' (Negri et al.) or 'extreme democracy' (Tom Attlee et al.).
 A new field of struggle arises (section 4.1.C), based on the defense and
 development of an Information Commons, against the corporate strategies
 who are trying to replace this 'free culture' (Lawrence Lessig) by a form
 of 'information feudalism' (described by Jeremy Rifkin in The Age of Access).
 We then examine the evolution of the monopolization of power (4.2.A.), the
 relations between the political ideals of freedom, equality, and hierarchy,
 and their practice in P2P (4.2.B), and place this discussion in the context
 of the general evolution of power and authority models (4.2.C)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Section Five discusses the discovery of P2P principles at work in physics,
 and in particularly in the physics of organisation, as developed by network
 theory, and its concept of 'small worlds', and hierarchical vs.
 egalitarian networks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In Section Six, we turn our attention to the cultural sphere.
 We claim and explain that the various expressions of P2P are a sympton
 of a profound cultural shift in the spheres of epistemology (ways of knowing)
 and of ontology (ways of feeling and being), leading to a new articulation
 between the individual and the collective (6.1.A), representing a true epochal
 shift.
 We then look at the spiritual field and how this affects the dialogue of
 civilizations and religions away from euro- and other exclusionist views
 in culture and religions (6.1.B); as well as to a critique of spiritual authorita
rianism and the emergence of cooperative inquiry groups and participatory
 spirituality conceptions (6.1.C), as theorized in particular by John Heron
 and Jorge Ferrer.
 The new ideas related to cosmology and metaphysics are explained in 6.1.D.,
 centered aroud the demise of the subject-object paradigm in favour of partnersh
ip-based visions of our relationships with matter and nature.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What does it all mean in terms of social change? In section 7 we examine
 if all of the above is just a collection of perhaps unrelated marginal
 trends, or rather, the view we espouse, represents the birth of a new and
 coherent social formation (section 7.1.A).
 In section 7.1.B we examine how P2P relates to the current system of cognitive
 capitalism (economics) or 'post' or 'late modernity' (cultural sphere),
 concluding that it is both within and beyond.
 Three scenarios are described (7.1.C): peaceful and complementary co-existence,
 the emergence of a cooperative civilization, and the destruction of P2P
 in the context of information feudalism.
 All of this leads us to concluding remarks on possible political strategies
 (7.1.D) to defend and expand P2P models, and to the principles behind the
 launch of a Foundation for P2P Alternatives (section 8).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
1.
 Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
1.A.
 What this essay is about
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The following essay describes the emergence, or expansion, of a specific
 type of relational dynamic, which I call peer to peer.
 It’s a form of human network-based organisation which rests upon the free
 participation of equipotent partners, engaged in the production of common
 resources, without recourse to monetary compensation as key motivating
 factor, and not organized according to hierarchical methods of command
 and control.
 It creates a Commons, rather than a market or a state, and relies on social
 relations to allocate resources rather than on pricing mechanisms or managerial
 commands.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This format is emerging throughout the social field: as a format of technology
 (the point to point internet, filesharing, grid computing, the Writeable
 Web initiatives, blogs), as a third mode of production which is also called
 Commons-based peer production (neither centrally planned nor profit-driven),
 producing hardware, software (often called Free Libre Open Sources Software
 or FLOSS) and intellectual and cultural resources (wetware) that are of
 great value to humanity (Wikipedia), and as a general mode of knowledge
 exchange and collective learning which is massively practiced on the internet.
 It also emerges as new organizational formats in politics, spirituality;
 as a new ‘culture of work’.
 This essay thus traces the expansion of this format, seen as a “isomorphism"
 (= having the same format), in as many fields as possible.
 The common format in which the peer to peer dynamic emerges is the format
 of the "distributed network", which, according to the defintion of A.
 Galloway in his book Protocol, differs both from the centralized network
 (all nodes have to pass through one single hub), and from the decentralized
 network (all nodes have to pass through hubs).
 In a distributed network the nodes, as autonomous agents, can connect through
 any number of links.
 Hubs may exist, but are not obligatory.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The essay tries not only to describe, but attempts to provide an explanatory
 framework of why it is emerging now, and how it fits in a wider evolutionary
 framework (not in the sense of an inevitable natural evolution, but as
 an intentional moral breakthrough).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The underlying logic of development in which the emergence of P2P is best
 understood, may be by viewing 'participation' as the key variable, seeing
 how it intensifies historically in various social formations.
 This idea was best expressed by John Heron in a personal communication:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"There seem to be at least four degrees of cultural development, rooted
 in degrees of moral insight and not in an evolutionary logic:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(1) autocratic cultures which define rights in a limited and oppressive
 way and there are no rights of political participation;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(2) narrow democratic cultures which practise political participation through
 representation, but have no or very limited participation of people in
 decision-making in all other realms, such as research, religion, education,
 industry etc.;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(3) wider democratic cultures which practice both political participation
 and varying degree of wider kinds of participation;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(4) commons p2p cultures in a libertarian and abundance-oriented global
 network with equipotential rights of participation of everyone in every
 field of human endeavour."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Note that within most of the sections, the organisation is as follows: the
 first subsection is descriptive, the second is explanatory, and the third
 is historical.
 In the latter, I use the triune distinction premodernity/modernity/postmodernit
y, well aware that it is a simplification, and that it collapses many important
 distinctions, say between the tribal and the agrarian era.
 But as an orienting generalization that allows the contrasting of the changes
 occurring after the emergence of modernity, it remains useful.Thus, the
 concept of ‘premodern’, means the societies based on tradition, before
 the advent of industrial capitalism, with fixed social roles and a social
 organisation inspired by what it believes to be a divine order; modern
 means essentially the era of industrial capitalism; finally, the choice
 of the term postmodern does not denote any specific preference in the ‘wars
 of interpretation’ between concepts such as postmodernity, liquid modernity,
 reflexitive modernity, transmodernity etc..
 It simple means the contermporary period, more or less starting after 1968,
 which is marked by the emergence of the informational mode of capitalism.
 I will use the term cognitive capitalism most frequently in my characterization
 of the current regime, as it corresponds to the interpretation, which is
 the most convincing in my view.
 The French magazine Multitude is my main source for such interpretations.
 It's essential meaning is the replacement of an older 'regime of accumulation',
 centered on machines and the division of labor corresponding to them; and
 one centered on being part of a process of accumulation of knowledge and
 creativity, as the new mainspring of power and profit.
 Finally, note that in the accompagnying graphs of figures, I sometimes
 use the "early modern/late modern/P2P era" framework.
 In this way, the current time frame can be distinguished from a hypothetical
 coming situation where P2P is more dominant than it is today, and what
 that would change in the characteristics of such a society.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I will conclude my essay with the conclusion that P2P is nothing else than
 a premise of a new type of civilization that is not exclusively geared
 towards the profit motive.
 What I have to convince the user of is that
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
- 1) a particular type of human relational dynamic is growing very fast
 across the social fields, and that such combined occurrence is the result
 of a deep shift in ways of feeling and being (ontology), of knowing (epistemolo
gy), and of core value constellations (axiology)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
- 2) That it has a coherent logic that cannot be fully contained within
 the present ‘regime’ of society.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
- 3) that it is not an utopia , but, as ‘an already existing social practice’,
 the seed of a likely major transformation to come.
 I will not be arguing that there is an 'inevitable evolutionary logic at
 work', but rather that a new and intentional moral vision, holds the potential
 for a major breakthrough in social evolution, leading to the possibility
 of a new political, economic, and cultural 'formation' with a new coherent
 logic.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Implicit in my interpretation of peer to peer as a social formation, is
 that it is accompanied by a nascent socio-political movement, much as industria
l class relations triggered a labour movement.
 In the case of the 'peer to peer movement' this movement concerns itself
 with the promotion and defense of the Commons, i.e.
 the existence of a common-property regime that exists alongside the state
 and the market, but which is also under threat by a frenetic movement to
 privately appropriate common resources.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Such a large overview will inevitably bring errors of interpretation concerning
 detailed fields.
 I would appreciate if readers could bring them to my attention.
 But apart from these errors, the essay should stand or fall in the context
 of its most general interpretative point: that there is indeed a isomorphic
 emergence of peer to peer throughout the social field, that despite the
 differences in expression, it is the same phenomena, and that it is not
 a marginal, but a 'fundamental' development.
 It is on this score that my effort should be judged.
 If the effort is indeed judged to be successful, I then would hope that
 this essay inspires people from these different fields to connect, aware
 that they are sharing a set of values, and that these values have potential
 in creating a better, but not perfect or ideal, society.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How does the explanatory framework which I will provide for P2P, differ
 from the use of the earlier metaphor of the network society, described
 by Manuel Castells and many others, and lately in particular by the network
 sociality concept proposed by Andreas Wittel? The best way to differentiate
 the approaches is to see P2P as a subset of network conceptions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If you would have been a social scientist during the lifetime of Marx and
 witnessed the emergence and growth of the factory-based industrial model,
 and you would then have arrived at the equivalent of what social network
 theory is today, i.e.
 an analysis of mainstream society and sociality.
 This is what the network sociality model of Andreas Wittel provides.
 But at the same time that the factory system was developing, a reaction
 was created as well.
 Workers were creating cooperatives and mutualities, unions and new political
 parties and movements, which would go on to fundamentally alter the world.
 Today, this is what happens with peer to peer.
 Whereas Castells and Wittel focus on the general emergence of network society
 and society, and describes the networks overall and the dominant features
 of it, I want and tend to focus on the birth of a counter-movement, centered
 around a particular format of sociality based in distributed networks,
 where the focus is on creating participation for all, and not the buttressing
 of the 'meshworks of exploitation'.
 As the dominant forces of society are mutating to networked forms of organizing
 the political economy (called Empire by Toni Negri), a bottom-up reaction
 against this new alienation is occurring (alienated, because in Empire,
 the meshwork are at the service of creating ever more inequality), by the
 forces of what Negri and Hardt call the multitude(s).
 These forces are using peer to peer processes, and a peer to peer ethos,
 to create new forms of social life, and this is what I want to document
 in this essay.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
1.B.
 Some acknowledgments
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This essay is part of a larger project, the writing of a French-language
 book, which I’m undertaking with Remi Sussan, a Paris-based free-lance
 journalist working for ‘digital’ magazines like TechnikArt.
 Hence, the continuing dialogue with him has been a great source of inspiration
 and clarification in terms of the ideas expressed in this essay.
 We share an enthousiasm for understanding P2P, though we frequently differ
 in our interpretations.
 The current essay therefore reflects my own vision.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A first essay on P2P, essentially descriptive, but supported by many citations,
 is available on the internet on the Noosphere.cc site, and was written in
 2003.
 However, most of these citations have now been integrated as endnotes.
 In this current essay, which was written pretty much in a ‘free flow of
 consciousness’ mode, though I will mention quite a few names of social
 theorists, citations have been kept at a minimum, but I may add them in
 later version as footnotes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Some acknowledgements about the sources used: amongst the contemporary and
 near-contemporary thinkers that I have been reading most recently in preparing
 this essay are: Norbert Elias (Elias, 1975), Louis Dumont (Vibert, 2004),
 and Cornelis Castoriadis (Castoriadis, 1975); the Italian-French school
 of thought around Multitude magazine, especially Toni Negri and Michael
 Hardt, Maurizio Lazzarato (Lazzarato, 2004), Philippe Zafirian (Zafirian,
 2003).Amongst the specific P2P pioneers I have read, are Pekka Himanen (Himanen,
 2002), for his study of work culture; John Heron (Heron, 1998) and Jorge
 Ferrer (Ferrer, 2001), for their work on participatory spirituality.
 Timothy Wilken of Synearth.org was instrumental in the discovery of the
 theories of Edward Haskell and Arthur Coulter, on synergetics and cooperation,
 which are explained on his website.
 Mackenzie Wark's Hacker Manifesto (Wark, 2004) and Alexander Galloway's
 Protocol (Galloway, 2004), have strongly influenced my analysis of P2P
 power structures.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
2.
 P2P as the Technological Framework of Cognitive Capitalism
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Alexander Galloway in his book Protocol makes an important and clear distinction
 between centralized networks (with one central hub where everything must
 pass and be authorized, as in the old telephone switching systems), decentraliz
ed systems, with more than one center, but these subcenters still being
 authorative (such as the airport system in the U.S.
 centered around hubs where planes must pass through), from distributed
 systems, where hubs may exist, but are not obligatory (such as the internet).
 In distributed networks, participants may freely link with each other,
 they are fully autonomous agents.
 Hence the importance to clearly distinguish between our usage of the concepts
 'decentralized' vs.
 'distributed'.
 Peer to peer is specifically the relational dynamic that arises in distributed
 networks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So: what is peer to peer? Here’s a first tentative definition: It is a specific
 form of relational dynamic, is based on the assumed equipotency of its
 participants , organized through the free cooperation of equals in view
 of the performance of a common task, for the creation of a common good,
 with forms of decision-making and autonomy that are widely distributed
 throughout the network.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
P2P processes are not structureless, but are characterized by dynamic and
 changing structures which adapt themselves to phase changes.
 It rules are not derived from an external authority, as in hierarchical
 systems, but generated from within.
 .
 It does not deny ‘authority’, but only fixed forced hierarchy, and therefore
 accepts authority based on expertise, initiation of the project, etc… P2P
 may be the first true meritocracy.
 The treshold for participation is kept as low as possible.
 Equipotency means that there is no prior formal filtering for participation,
 but rather that it is the immediate practice of cooperation which determines
 the expertise and level of participation.
 Communication is not top-down and based on strictly defined reporting rules,
 but feedback is systemic, integrated in the protocol of the cooperative
 system.
 Techniques of 'participation capture' and other social accounting make
 automatic cooperation the default scheme of the project.
 Personal identity becomes partly generated by the contribution to the common
 project.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
P2P is a network, not a hierarchy (though it may have elements of it); it
 is 'distributed', though it may have elements of centralization and 'decentrali
sation'; intelligence is not located at any center, but everywhere within
 the system.
 Assumed equipotency means that P2P systems start from the premise that
 ‘it doesn’t know where the needed resource will be located’, it assumes
 that ‘everybody’ can cooperate, and does not use formal rules in advance
 to determine its participating members.
 Equipotency, i.e.
 the capacity to cooperate, is verified in the process of cooperation itself.
 Validation of knowledge, acceptance of processes, are determined by the
 collective.
 Cooperation must be free, not forced, and not based on neutrality (i.e.
 the buying of cooperation in a monetary system).
 It exists to produce something.
 It enables the widest possible participation.
 These are a number of characteristics that we can use to describe P2P systems
 ‘in general’, and in particular as it emerges in the human lifeworld.
 Whereas participants in hierarchical systems are subject to the panoptism
 of the select few who control the vast majority, in P2P systems, participants
 have access to holoptism, the ability for any participant to see the whole.
 Further on we will examine more in depth characteristics such as de-formalisati
on, de-institutionalisation, de-commodification, which are also at the heart
 of P2P processes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Whereas hierarchical systems are based on creating homogeinity amongst its
 'dependent' members, distributed networks using the P2P dynamic regulate
 the 'interdependent' participants preserving heterogeinity.
 It is the 'object of cooperation' itself which creates the temporary unity.
 Culturally, P2P is about unity-in-diversity, it is concrete 'post-Enlightenment
' universalism predicated on common projects; while hierarchy is predicated
 on creating sameness through identification and exclusion, and is associated
 with the abstract universalism of the Enlightenment.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To have a good understanding of P2P, I suggest the following mental exercise,
 think about these characteristics, then about their opposites.
 So doing, the radical innovative nature of P2P springs to mind.
 Though P2P is related to earlier social modes, those were most in evidence
 in the early tribal era, and it now emerges in an entirely new context,
 enabled by technologies that go beyond the barriers of time and space.
 After the dominance during the last several millennia, of centralized and
 hierarchical modes of social organisation, it is thus in many ways now
 a radically innovative emergence, and also reflects a very deep change
 in the epistemological and ontological paradigms that determine behaviour
 and worldviews.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important clarification is that when we say that peer to peer systems
 have no hierarchy or are not centralized, we do not necessarily mean the
 complete absence of such characteristics.
 But in a P2P system, the use of hierarchy and centralization, serve the
 goal of participation and many-to-many communication, and are not used
 to prohibit or dominate it.
 This means that though P2P arises in distributed networks, not all distributed
 networks exhibit P2P processes.
 Many distributed bottom-up processes, such as the swarming behaviour of
 insects, of the behaviour of buyers and sellers in market, are not true
 P2P processes, to the degree that they lack holoptism, and do not promote
 participation.
 P2P, as a uniquely human phenomenom integrates moral and intentional aspects.
 When distributed meshworks, for example interlinking boards of directors
 , serve a hierarchy of wealth and power, and are based on exclusion rather
 than participation, this does not quality as a full P2P process.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
P2P can be a partial element of another process; or it can be a full process.
 For examples, the technological and collaborative infrastructure build
 around P2P principles, may enable non-P2P processes.
 In the example just above it is the infrastructure of Empire, but it can
 also enables new types of marketplaces , gift/sharing economy practices.
 Where P2P is a full process, we will argue that it is a form of communal
 shareholding producing a new type of Commons.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
2.1.B.
 The emergence of peer to peer as technological infrastructure
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But how does all of the above it apply to technology?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this and the next section, I will attempt to describe two related aspects.
 One is that P2P-formatted technologies are now the very infrastructure
 of business processes.
 Second, that the new technologies of communication being created are in
 fact an alternative communication infrastructure that in part transcends
 the state and corporate control of traditional one-to-many mass media.
 It is also emerging as a infrastructure of the free cooperation of autonomous
 agents.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is not to say that the new infrastructure is not controlled 'at all',
 that corporate forces are not at work in it, but means that we cannot be
 blind to its radical potential, and radical 'actuality' neither.
 Here as in the other sections we will see how P2P is at the same time the
 very basis of the system, while also significantly transcending it.
 While there is no direct cause to effect link between peer to peer technology,
 as such, and the peer to peer relational dynamic which is the topic of
 our research.
 Peer to peer technology is more likely than centralized technology to be
 a technological basis for enabling and supporting peer to peer human relationsh
ips.
 This relationship is borne out by our description of the use of P2P technologie
s to create an alternative peer-based communications infrastructure (2.1.C),
 as well as for an infrastructure of human cooperation (2.1.D.).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Internet, as it was conceived by its founders (Abbate, 1999), and evolved
 in its earliest format, was a point to point network, consisting of equal
 networks, and the travel of data uses different sets of resources as necessary.
 It is only later, after the rise of stronger and weaker networks, of open,
 semi-closed and closed networks, that the internet became hybrid, but it
 still in essence functions as a distributed network, having no central
 core to manage the system.
 Its hierarchical elements, such as the layered internet protocol stack
 (though specifically designed to allow P2P processes), the domain name
 system (a decentralized system of authorative servers which can disconnect
 participants, you can't arrive at an address without DNS intervention),
 or internet governance bodies , do not prohibit many-to-many communication
 and participation, but enable it.
 The evolution of the internet is largely seen to be 'organic' rather than
 centrally directed, no single central player can direct it, though some
 players are more influential than others.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The web similarly was seen as a many-to-many publishing medium, even though
 it follows a semi-hierarchical client-server model (hence decentralized
 rather than distributed).
 However, it is still and will remain a essentially participative medium
 allowing anyone to publish his own webpages.
 Because of its incomplete P2P nature, it is in the process of becoming
 a true P2P publishing medium in the form of the Writeable Web projects
 (also called the read/write web), that allow anyone to publish from his
 own or any other computer,in the form of blogging etc… Other P2P media
 are instant messaging, chat, IP telephony systems, etc..
 For the internet and the web, P2P was not yet explicitly theorized (though
 the idea of a network of networks was), they are weak P2P system in that
 they only recognize ‘strong’ members, DNS-addressed computers in the internet,
 servers in the case of the web.
 In the systems developed afterwards, P2P was explicitly theorized: they
 are ‘strong’ P2P systems, in which all members, also the weak members (without
 fixed DNS address for the internet, blogs with permalinks in case of the
 web) can participate.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Filesharing systems were the first to be explicitly tagged with the P2P
 label, and this is probably the origin of the concept in the world of technolog
y.
 In such systems, all voluntary computers on the internet are mobilized
 to share files amongst all participating systems, whether that be documents,
 audiofiles, or audiovisual materials.
 In June 2003, videostreaming became the internet application using the
 largest bandwidth, and some time before, online music distribution had
 already surpassed the physical distribution of CD’s (in the U.S.).
 Of course, in the public mind filesharing is mostly associated with the
 sharing of piracy of copyrighted music and video's .
 Though the earliest incarnations of these P2P systems still used centralized
 databases, they are now, largely thanks to the efforts of the music industry
 , mostly true P2P systems, in particular Bittorrent and the planned development
 of Exeem.
 Each generation of P2P filesharing has been more consistent in its applications
 of peer to peer principles .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finally, grid computing uses the P2P concept to create ‘participative supercompu
ters’, where resources, spaces, computing cycles can be used from any participan
t in the system, on the basis of need.
 It is generally seen as the next paradigm for computing.
 Even programming now uses the P2P concept of object-oriented programming,
 where each object can be seen as a node in a distributed network.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All of the above clearly shows that the new format of our technological
 infrastructure, which lies at the basis of basic and economic processes,
 follow the P2P design.
 This infrastructure enables the interlinking of business processes, beyond
 the borders of the individual factory and company, and the interlinking
 of all the individuals involved.
 Soon, and perhaps it is already the case today, it will be justified to
 claim that without P2P-formatted technologies, it will be impossible to
 carry out production and all the related economic mechanisms.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I could go on, but what should emerge in your mind, is not a picture of
 a series of marginal developments, but the awareness that P2P networks
 are the key format of the technological infrastructure that supports the
 current economic, political and social systems.
 Companies have used these technologies to integrate their processes with
 those of partners, suppliers, consumers, and each other, using a combination
 of intranets, extranets, and the public internet, and it has become the
 absolutely essential tool for international communication and business,
 and to enable the cooperative, internationally coordinated projects carried
 out by teams.
 As we will see in our full review on the emergence of P2P practices across
 the social field, an emphasis on business and economic processes would
 be very one-sided.
 Politics, culture, and science are equally changed by distributed practices
 enabled by the new technological infrastructure.
 Examples are the grown of massive multi-authorship in different scientific
 fields, with hundreds of people involved in research projects, and the
 distributed use of scientific instruments, such as arrays of small radio
 telescopes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On the other hand, P2P systems are not just the outcome of plans of the
 establishment, but are the result of the active intervention of consumers
 avid for free access to culture, of knowledge workers actively working
 to find technical solutions for their needed cooperative work, and of activists
 consciously working for the creation of tools for an emerging participative
 culture .
 P2P is both 'within' and 'beyond' the current system.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
2.1.C.
 The construction of an alternative media infrastructure
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Distributed technological networks are the most important infrastructure
 for cognitive capitalism.
 But as a communication infrastructure, the dominant transnational corporations
 could for a long time rely on their own private telecommunication networks.
 The internet has radically democratized access to this kind of infrastructure,
 to everyone with access to a computer.
 Similarly, for its cultural hegemony, the dominant social system has relied
 on "one to many" broadcasting system, which require a heavy capital outlay,
 and are controlled by monopolistic corporate interests, in charge of 'manufactu
red consent', and in other countries, by the state itself.
 The stranglehold of corporate media is such, including its hold on our
 very psyche's (we 'think like television' even when we've not been watching
 it for years).
 It has become all but impossible for any social minority (except religious
 and ethnic groups which can marshall vast resources themselves) to have
 its voice heard.
 Media reform seems definitely beyond reach.
 However, though the internet is also characterized by a certain commercial
 exploitation, and by very strong commercial entities such as Yahoo, as
 a whole, and as a distributed network, it is not owned nor controlled by
 commercial entities, but by a network of various entities: commercial,
 governmental, nongovernmental, etc...
 It contains the historical promise of an 'alternative information and communica
tion infrastructure', a many to many, bottom-up resource that can be used
 by various social forces.
 Mackenzie Wark, in his Hacker Manifesto, distinguishes the producers of
 immaterial use value, from the owners of the vectors of information, without
 whom no exchange value can be realized.
 The promise of the internet is that we now have a vector of information
 production, distribution and exchange, that functions at least partly outside
 of the control of what he calls the 'vectoralist' class.
 The situation seems to be the following, and we use the distinctions drawn
 up by Yochai Benkler in his "The Political Economy of the Commons" essay.
 The physical layer, networks, and communication lines, are widely distributed
 between commercial, state, and academic interests, with no single player
 or set of players dominating, and the computers themselves are widely in
 the hands of the public and civil society.
 The logical layer, especially TCP/IP, and increasingly the various aspects
 of the read/write Web, the filesharing protocols are still systematically
 rigged for participation.
 The content layer, is on the one hand subject to an increasingly harsh
 intellectual property regime, but, commercial players are themselves subject
 to the logic of the economy of attention and the Wisdom Game, dictating
 policies of information sharing and giving, in order to get the attention.
 Next to the commercial portals, which may or may not play a nefarious role,
 the public is widely enabled to create its own content, and has been doing
 so by the millions.
 While part of the previously existing Information Commons or public domain
 is disappearing, other parts are being continuously constructed through
 the myriad combined efforts of civil society users.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This process is in full swing and is what we attempt to describe in this
 section.
 Below, I reproduce an adapted version of a diagram from Hans Magnus Enzensberge
r, which outlines the difference between 'repressive' and 'emancipatory'
 media.
 Without any doubt, the emerging alternative media infrastructure has an
 overwhelming number of characteristics of being an 'emancipatory' medium:
 1) it is based on distributed programming (not just a few); 2) each receiver
 is a potential transmitter (not just a few broadcasters); 3) it has mobilizatio
n potential (it doesn't generate passivity); 4) it is characterized by interacti
on and self-production; 5) it enables a political learning process; it allows
 collective production by equipotent participants; 6) the social control
 is effected through self-organisation.
 Just compare this list to the characteristics of corporate television!
 Thus, the historical importance of these developments seems overwhelmingly
 clear.
 This does not mean that the alternative internet media infrastructure automatic
ally leads to emancipation, but that it can certainly enable political processes
 in that direction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let us now summarise these developments in technical terms.
 In terms of media, the broadband internet is rapidly mutating to enhance
 the capacities to create distributed online publishing in the form of the
 Writeable Web (also called read-write web) and blogging in particular;
 the distribution of audio programming is possible through internet radio
 and various audioblogging developments such podcasting (audio content,
 music or video distribution through iPod or MP3 players), and other types
 of 'time-shifted radio' such as mobcasting ('casting' to mobile phones),
 and even Skypecasting (using the popular Voice over Internet Telephony
 software Skype , but for broadcasting purposes, especially Internet radio
 programs).
 Audiovisual distribution, which we can call public webcasting as it incorporate
s both audio and video, is possible through the emerging video blogging
 (vlogging ), but mostly through broadband P2P filesharing systems such
 as Bittorrent and Exeem , now already responsible for the majority of internet
 traffic .
 While Exeem is still in development at the time of writing this paragraph
 (June 2005), Bittorrent is considered to be a major innovation making easy
 broadband-based audiovisual distribution all but inevitable.
 A wide variety of associated services is being developed by small companies
 or cooperative groups to assist citizens in their own production of audiovisual
 material .
 What these services such as Common Bits and the Broadcast Machine do, is
 to transform Bittorrent technology into a internet broadcasting platform
 that can be used by common users without expert technical knowledge.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All these developments taking together mean that the creation of an alternative
 information and communication infrastructure, outside of the control and
 ownership of the state and corporate-based one-to-many broadcasting systems,
 is well under way.
 These developments are not the product of a conscious activist strategy
 as the one proposed by Mark Pesce and practiced by players such as Indymedia,
 but it also to a large degree the natural outgrowth of the empowerment
 of the users, who, whenever they by a WiFi hub, or install Skype for personal
 usage, or any other natural act of ameliorating their own connectivity,
 are building this alternative infrastructure, from the edges onward, step
 by step, and this is also why it seems quite unstoppable .
 In a sense, this is another example of the 'production without a manufacturer'
 or 'the supply-side supplying itself, explained in 3.1.A (and notes).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These technological developments form the basis for a new practice of citizen-pr
oduced 'journalism' or 'reporting' by a 'self-informing public' centered
 around the phenomemon of blogs, and augmented by the other techniques we
 have been discussing .
 See the example of the Korean OhMyNews , working with 35,000 citizen reporters
 and 40 staff members, as an example of a new type of hybrid journalism.
 These developments are a new vehicle for the production of 'public opinion',
 for the creation, expression , distribution and sharing of knowledge.
 And it is both supplementing and competing with the traditional mass media
 vehicles that used to mold public opinion .
 It represents an important opportunity to distribute views that fall outside
 the purview of 'manufactured consent'.
 Clay Shirky has called it a 'process of mass amateurisation' , an analysis
 that is related to my own concept of 'de-institutionalisation', a key aspect
 of peer to peer process which I discuss in 3.3.C.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All this outpouring of expression, news and commentary is interlinked in
 a blogosphere, which has developed its own techniques to distill what is
 important, from what is less important.
 Similar with the broadcast model is that the blogosphere still has hubs
 and connectors drawing large crowds, but different is that it creates the
 possibility of a "long tail".
 This means that whereas in the broadcast world the distribution curve bottoms
 out at the end, with no resources left for minority interests, in P2P media,
 this bottoming out does not occur (the curve flattens before reaching the
 bottom), because the possibility exists of creating thousands upon thousands
 of micro-communities, organized by affinity.
 David Weinberger, focusing on the role of the blog for the individual,
 says it is 'an expression of 'the self in conversation' , that is available
 as a permanent record (through the innovation of permalinks,which create
 a fixed and permanent URL for every entry, unlike webpages which were always
 subject to change and disappearance).
 A crucial innovation for the spread of blogs has been the development of
 RSS feeds , i.e.
 Really Simple Syndication, which allows internet users to 'subscribe' to
 any blog they like, and to manage the totality of their feeds through their
 email, RSS reader software, or online sites like Bloglines.
 Related to the emergence and growth of the blogosphere, is the growth in
 self-publishing, no longer the domain of dejected authors, but becoming
 a first choice for many who desire to reach a public directly without the
 traditional publisher intermediaries .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Therefore, in physical terms, for the evolving telecommunications infrastructure
, the broadcast model is being replaced by the ‘meshwork system’, which
 is already used by the Wireless Commons movement to create a worldwide
 wireless communications network that aims to bypass the Telco infrastructure
 .
 Several local governments aim to aid such a process .
 For Yochai Benkler,the development of a "Open physical layer" based on
 open wireless networks, the so-called Spectrum Commons, is a key precondition
 for the existence of a "Core Common Infrastructure".
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In such a system a wide array of local networks is created at very low cost,
 while they are interlinked with ‘bridges’.
 The technical breakthrough making this possible is the invention of Viral
 Communicators , or meshworks of cooperating devices that do not need an
 infrastructure or a backbone but themselves create the network through
 their excess capacity.
 Communication on these networks follows a P2P model, just like the internet.
 Mark Pesce has already developed a realistic proposal to build an integrated
 alternative network within ten years , based on similar premises, and with
 the additional concept of developing a 'Open Source TV Tuner' which he
 predicts will completely overturn traditional broadcasting.
 (The same technology could also be used for phone calls, once hybrid WiFi
 phones are available .) He has developed serious arguments about why 'netcasting
' is not only economically feasible, but superior to the broadcasting model
 .
 There are also already commercial versions of ‘file-serving television’
 models such as the one pioneered by TiVo as well as the different plans
 involving TV over Internet Protocol .
 "Radio Your Way" is a similar, though less popular, application for radio
 and there is a similar broad array of internet radio developments .
 Telephony using the Internet Protocol , recently popularized by Skype,
 is similarly destined to overcome the limitations of the hitherto centralized
 telephone system.
 P2P is generally seen as the coming format of the telecommunication infrastruct
ure, even by the industry itself, and confirmed by my own former experience
 as strategic planner in that industry.
 British Telecom has declared that by 2008, the entirety of its network
 will have been converted to TCP/IP protocols.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
While mobile telephony is strongly centralized and controlled, it will have
 to compete with wireless broadband networks, and users are busily turning
 it into yet another participative medium, as described by Howard Rheingold
 in Smart Mobs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the above phenomenology of P2P, notice that I have taken an extreme literal
 definition of P2P, as many hybrid forms exist, but the important and deciding
 factor is: does it enable the participation of equipotent members? One
 of the key factors is: how inclusionary is the social practice, or technology,
 or theory ,or any other manifestation of the P2P ethos.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These developments almost certainly mean that a new format of distribution
 and consumption is arising.
 At stake is the eventual unsustainability of the current TV broadcast model,
 in which the TV stations sell their audiences to advertisers, because they
 control the audience and the distribution of the programs.
 In the new form of distribution, in which users themselves take control
 of the choice and timing of the programs, because of the easy replication
 throughout the internet, both disintermediation and re-intermediation occur.
 The "hyperdistribution" of audiovisual material, think about the millions
 already downloading movies and TV programs, creates a direct link between
 producers and consumers.
 However, the economy of attention suggests process of re-intermediation.
 But as we have seen in the blogosphere for printed content, this process
 can be undertaken by clever algorhythms and protocols and reputation-based
 systems, coupled with processes of viral diffusion of recommendations in
 affinity groups, and do not necessarily mean commercial portals or intermediari
es.
 In a upcoming book, Mark Pesce has coined the concept of 'hyperpeople'
 to describe the new generation of techno-savvy youngsters who are already
 living this new reality, and as the technology becomes increasingly easier
 to use, it will be spreading throughout the population.
 And of course, it is not just a new form of consumption, there are also
 changes at the producer side, with audiences becoming themselves the producers
 of audiovisual material, as we can see in the growth of podcasting programs.
 Two consequences flow from this.
 First, the generalization of the phenomemom of the "Long Tail",whereby
 minority audiences are no longer constrained by the 'lowest common-denominator'
 mass media and mass marketing logic; and we can expect a flowering of creativit
y and self-expression.
 Second, the possibility of new majorities of taste and opinion forming,
 outside of the constraints of the mass production of unified corporate
 taste.
 As we expect from the playing out of P2P processes, we see both a strengthening
 of personal autonomy and a new type of collectivity.
 For some time now, we have seen democracies bypass majority opinions and
 the development of hypermanipulation.
 The hope is that techno-social developments are creating the possibility
 of a new balance of power, a 'second superpower' of global public opinion
 that is more democratic in character.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To judge the progress or regress of these efforts, we should look at development
s in the physical layer of the internet: who owns and controls it, at present
 a wide variety of players, with a key role for the public and civil society
 who own the computers which are in fact the intelligent core of the internet;
 the logical layer or protocols, which pits closed systems against open
 systems in a continious conflict; and the content layer, which pits the
 free creation of an Information Commons against permanent attempts to strengthe
n restrictive intellectual property rights.
 According to Yochai Benkler, what we need is a Core Commons Infrastructure,
 which would consist of an
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
an open physical layer in the form of open wireless networks, a 'spectrum
 commons'
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
an open logical layer, i.e.
 systematic preference for open protocols and open platforms 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
an open content layer, which means the roll back of too restrictive IP laws
 geared to defend business monopolies and stifle the development of a free
 culture 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's conclude by assessing the current 'techno-social' state of progress
 of such an alternative infrastructure:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Bittorrent , Exeem, and other software programs enable broadband peercasting
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Viral diffusion exists to circulate information about programming 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What needs to be built is:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
a meshwork of netcasting transmitters, as proposed by Mark Pesce 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
user-friendly desktop software, to manage content (Pesce's Open Tuner proposal)
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
better social mechanisms to select quality into such an alternative framework
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
2.1.D.
 P2P as a global platform for autonomous cooperation 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We have described peer to peer as the technological infrastructure of cognitive
 capitalism, and as an alternative information and communications infrastructure.
 But is also emerging as much more than that: as a whole set of enabling
 technologies that allow global affinity groups to work and create value
 together on a autonomous basis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's quickly review what we have already seen, but in this new context.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As a technological infrastructure we have seen how grid computing can function
 as a way to combine untapped resources that lay dormant throughout the
 network.
 Since human processing power is inherently slower than computer processes,
 no single user uses his resources to the full, and this capacity can now
 be combined in common projects.
 Using this methodology any community can now mobilize vast 'super-computing'-li
ke resources.
 Filesharing is also an example of the same ability, which can be extended
 to any meshwork of devices that can be connected.
 Resources that can be shared are computer processing power, memory storage,
 any content located on any participating computer, and collective monitoring
 through all kinds of interconnected sensors.
 The key role in this systems is that any participant automatically becomes
 a provider.
 Any user of the Skype telephony networks also offers his PC as a resource
 for the network, as does any filesharer, or user of Bittorrent.
 This obligatory participation can be generalized because it comes at no
 extra cost to the owner of the technological resource.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As a information and communications infrastructure it enables any group
 to communicate and create online knowledge collectives and to become a
 publisher.
 A combination of the open source infrastructure consisting of the Linux
 operating system, the Apache web server, the MySQL database system, the
 PHP publishing system (the four together are grouped together under the
 concept of the LAMP infrastructure) combined with BitTorrent, allow for
 full-scale broadband multimedia webcasting.
 In addition, self-publishing, i.e.
 the publishing of fully-fledged print or e-books through printing-on-demand
 systems that do not require the intermediation of a formal publishers ,
 is rapidly becoming an accepted means of distributing books, and it is
 practiced even by established authors, when they want to reach specialized
 audiences that are not of interest to a traditional publisher.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Social mobile computing enables dispersed groups to act in a coherent fashion,
 it is a powerful agent of mobilization.
 Such mobile or non-mobile networks are also known as 'group forming networks'
 since they enable the formation of subgroups.
 All kinds of social software has been developed to enable the emergence
 and management of webs of cooperation which go beyond information sharing.
 Amongst these are the various forms of social networking software that
 are based on the theory of 'six degrees of separation' which says that
 anybody in the world is connected to anybody else through no more than
 6 steps.
 Friends-of-a-friend software is a fast growing segment.
 These type of software is often coupled to 'presencing' software which
 allow you to know, who is also visiting your webpage, whom of your friends
 is available for instant messaging, and mobile proximity alert services
 which tell you if one of your associates is close by, by using 'geo-location'
 services such as GPS (Global Positioning Systems).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A crucial ingredient are the social accounting tools, which allow anyone
 to judge and know about the degree of participation and trustworthyness
 of other members of the network, through communal validation processes.
 Similar in intent are formal ratings systems, such as the one used by Amazon
 to rate books, often used to gauge the reputation and trustworthyness (eBay,
 Slashdot's karma system).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Automatic referral systems or recommendation systems look to like-minded
 users by presenting each other's tastes, a system also used by Amazon.
 Google's success in present the most appropriate results is to a large
 degree the result of its decision to rank any resource accoding to the
 'collective wisdom' of web users, i.e.
 calculating the pointers from other webpages.
 The latter are called 'implicit' referral systems since they do not require
 any conscious decision by users.
 Sites are learning to use the collective judgment of their participants
 through opinion sites (Epinion), through social bookmarking sites, with
 collective online publishing systems such as Slashdot and KuroShin using
 self-evaluation ratings.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A number of companies such as Groove and Shinkuro, aim to develop fully
 fledged cooperation environments .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The point of all the above is to show how software is being created that
 has at its aim to enhance various forms of collaboration.
 We are only at the beginning of a process whereby participation becomes
 embedded in most of the new software , a move away from the individual
 bias which was originally at the basis of personal computing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Howard Rheingold and others, in an excellent overview of Technologies of
 Cooperation, has outlined seven dimensions of such cooperative ventures.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
the structures are dynamic and evolving, not static.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The rules are not imposed by any outside authority, but emerge from the
 group itself
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The resources are made available to the public, not kept private or available
 through sales
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Tresholds are kept as low as possible, so that anyone can participate
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Feedback becomes systemic, through the use of social accounting software
 and other forms of 'participation capture'
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Memory is becoming persistent, and no longer ephemeral as it was in the
 first phase of everchanging URL's
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Identity is derived from the group and participation in the group
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Howard Rheingold has also distilled seven recommendations to anyone thinking
 of launching technology-enabled cooperative ventures:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
shift from designing systems to providing platforms.
 The system must allow emergent structures decided upon by the participants
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
engage the community in designing the rules: the protocol must be democratically
 arrived at
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
learn how to tap invisible resources
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
track thresholds and phase changes: this is important as online communities
 evolve through various phases that have different rules and success factors
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
foster diverse feedback loops
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
convert present knowledge into deep memory: through archiving, persistent
 addressing, version control and archiving, contributions are never disgarded
 but remain available
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
support participatory identities, through keeping track of contributions
 so that this process acts as a recognition for the participants.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is important to envisage the availability of such an ecology of cooperative
 tools as enabling autonomous cooperation and peer production, and not just
 as an auxiliary to the corporate world.
 In our overview of the emergence of P2P in the economic sphere we will
 see that this is not a pious wish.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
2.2.
 Explaining the Emergence of P2P technology
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why this emergence? The short answer is: P2P is a consequence of abundance
 (in fact it is both cause and consequence).
 With the advent of the ‘Information Age’ that started with mass media and
 unintegrated private networks for multinationals, but especially with the
 advent of the internet and the web itself, which allow for digital copying
 and distribution of any digital creation at marginal cost, information
 abundance is created.
 For business processes, the keyword becomes ‘flow’, and the integration
 of these endless flows.
 Production of material goods is predicated on the management of immaterial
 flows.
 In such a context, centralized systems almost inevitably create bottlenecks
 holding up the flow.
 In a P2P system, any node can contact any other node, without passing through
 such bottlenecks.
 Hierarchy only works with scarcity, and in a situation where the control
 of scarce resources determines the end result of the zero-sum power games
 being conducted.
 In a situation of abundance, centralized nodes cannot possible cope .
 From the engineering standpoint therefore, P2P is an appropriate solution
 to distribute workloads among a large number of loads, a solution which
 is effective in many case, but not always.
 Information, I probably do not need to remind the reader of this, is different
 from material goods, in that its sharing does not diminish its value, but
 on the contrary augments it.
 Conclusion: P2P is 'deblocking'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Second, P2P systems are predicated on redundancy, several resources are
 always available to conduct any process.
 This makes them a lot less vulnerable than centralized systems to any kind
 of disruption, P2P systems are extraordinarily robust.
 One cannot, in terms of resources, compare any centralized system, to the
 extraordinary combination of millions of peripheral systems with the billions
 and trillions of unused memory, computing cycles, etc….
 These are only unlocked in a P2P system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Abundance is again both a cause and a consequence of complexity.
 In a situation of a multiplication of flows, flows that no longer follow
 predetermined routes, it cannot possible be predicted, where the ‘solution’
 for any problem lies.
 Expertise comes out of a precise combination of experience, which is unpredicta
ble in advance.
 Thus, systems are needed that allow expertise to unexpectedly announce
 itself, when it learns that it is needed.
 This is precisely what P2P systems allow to an unprecendented degree.
 Conclusion: P2P is 'enabling'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There is also a 'democratic rationale' to the above enabling of resources.
 Since it is a bottom-up rather than a top-down process.
 P2P is 'empowering'.
 It reflects the cultural evolution towards an ethos of sharing abundant
 resources that gain value through their distribution.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
2.3.A.
 Placing P2P in the context of the evolution of technology
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Premodern technology was participative, and not as differentiated and autonomous.
 The instruments of artisans were extensions of their bodies, with which
 they ‘cooperated’.
 The social lifeworld, was not yet as differentiated into different spheres
 or into subject/object distinctions, since they saw themselves, not as
 much as separate and autonomous individuals, but much more as parts of
 a whole, following the dictates of the whole (holism), moving in a world
 dominated by spirits, the spirits of men (the ancestors), of the natural
 world, and of the objects they used.
 (Dumont, 1981).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Modern technology could be said to be differentiated (division of labour,
 differentiation of social fields, relative autonomy of technological evolution)
, but is no longer participative.
 The subject-object dichotomy means that nature becomes a resource to be
 used (objects used by subjects).
 But the object, the technological instrument, also becomes autonomous,
 and in the factory system typical of modernity, a dramatic reversal takes
 place: it is the human who becomes a ‘dumb’ extension of the machine.
 The intelligence is not so much located in the machine, but in the organization
 of the production, of which both humans and machines are mere cogs.
 Modern machines are not by itself intelligent, and are organized in hierarchica
l frameworks.
 Modern humans think themselves as autonomous agents using objects, but
 become themselves objects of the systems of their own creation.
 This is the drama of modernity, the key to its alienation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In post-modernity, machines become intelligent (though not in the same way
 as humans, they can only use the intelligence put in them by the humans,
 and so far lack the creative innovation, problem-solving and decision-making
 capabilities).
 While the old paradigm of humans as objects in a system certainly persists,
 a new paradigm is being born.
 The intelligent machines become computers, extensions now of the human
 brain and nervous system (instead of being extensions of the external limbs
 and internal functions of the body in the industrial system).
 Humans again start cooperating with the computers, seen as extensions of
 their selves, their memories, their logical processes, but also and this
 is crucial: it enables affective communication amongst a much wider global
 community of humans.
 Of course, within the context of cognitive capitalism (defined as the third
 phase of capitalism where immaterial processes are more important than
 the material production; where information ‘as property’ becomes the key
 asset), all this still operates in a wider context of exploitation and
 domination, but the potential is there for a new model which allies both
 differentiation (the autonomous individual retains his freedom and prerogatives
), and participation.
 Within the information paradigm, the world of matter (nanotech), life (biotech)
 and mind (AI) are reduced to their informational basis, which can be manipulate
d, and this opens up nightmarish possibilities of the extension of the resource-
manipulation paradigm, now involving our very own bodies and psyches.
 However, because of the equally important paradigm of participation, the
 possibility arises of a totally new, subjective-objective, cooperative
 way of looking at this, and this is an element of hope.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
According to the reworking of Foucault's insights by Deleuze and Guattari,
 there is a clear connection between the type of society and the type of
 technology that is dominant.
 Simple mechanistical machines were dominant in the classical period of
 modernity, the period of sovereignity (18th cy.); thermodynamic systems
 became dominant in the 19th cy, inaugurating disciplinary societies; finally
 Deleuze dates the advent of control societies, to the advent of cybernetic
 machines and computers.
 Our sections on the evolution of power will detail this aspect of the evolution
 of technology.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
2.3.B.
 P2P and Technological Determinism
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Starting our description with the emergence of P2P within the field of technolog
y could be misconstrued as saying that P2P is a result of technology, in
 a ‘technology-deterministic fashion’.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The precise role of technology in human evolution is subject to debate.
 A first group of positions sees technology as ‘neutral’.
 Humans want more control over their environment, want to go beyond necessity,an
d in that quest, built better and better tools.
 But how we use these tools is up to us.
 Many inventors of technology and discoverers of scientific truths have
 argued this way, saying for example that atomic energy can be used for
 good (energy) or for bad (war), but that is entirely a political decision.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A different set of positions argues that on the contrary, technological
 development has a logic of its own, that as a system is goes beyond the
 intention of any participating individual, and in fact becomes their master.
 In such a reading, technological evolution is inevitable and has unforeseen
 consequences.
 In the pessimistic vision, it’s in fact the ultimate form of alienation.
 This is so because technology is an expression of just a part of our humanity,
 instrumental reason, but when embedded in the technological systems and
 its machines, it then forces us to ressemble it, and we indeed follow the
 logic of machines loose many parts of our full humanity.
 Think of the positions of Heidegger, Baudrillard, and Virilio as exemplars
 of such a type of analysis.
 Like-minded analysis would point out that though strict Taylorism has disappear
ed from immaterial-based production ,the factory model has in fact spread
 out throughout society now, forming a kind of ‘Social Taylorism’.
 Efficiency and productivity thinking has taken over the sphere of intimacy.
 There has been a dramatic destruction of social knowledge and skill, of
 autonomous cultures, and this type of knowledge has been ‘appropriated’
 by the system of capital, and re-sold to us a commodities.
 Think of paid-for online dating, as a symptom of the loss of skill in dating,
 as one example.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Technological determinism can also have a optimistic reading.
 In this view, for example represented by the progress ideology of the late
 19th century, and currently by the technological transhumanists, such as
 Kurzweil (Kurzweil, 2000), technology represents an increasing mastery
 and control over nature, a means of going beyond the limitations set to
 us by nature, and, for this type of interpretation, that is an entirely
 good thing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The position I personally feel the closest to is the ‘critical philosophy
 of technology’ developed by Andrew Feenberg (Feenberg, 1991, 1999).
 In his analysis, technological artifacts are a social construction, reflecting
 the various social interests: those of capital, those of the engineering
 community conceiving it, but also, those of the critical voices within
 that community, and of the ‘consumers’ subverting the original aims of
 technology for entirely unforeseen usages.
 Feenberg comes very close to recognize the new form of power that we discuss
 in section four: i.e.
 the protocollary power (Galloway, 2004) which concerns the ‘code’.
 The very form of the code, whether it is for the hardware or the software,
 reflects what usages can be made of technology.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is in this sense that I see a first important relation between the emergence
 of P2P and its technological manifestations.
 The engineers who conceived the point to point internet already had a wholly
 new set of conceptions which they integrated in their design.
 It was in fact explicitely designed to enable peer-based scientific collaborati
on.
 Thus, the emergence of peer to peer as a phenomena spanning the whole social
 field is not ‘caused’ by technology; it is rather the opposite, the technology
 reflects a new way of being and feeling, which we will discuss in section
 6A in particular.
 This position is a version of that put forward by Cornelis Castoriadis
 in his "L'Institution Imaginaire de la Societe".
 Society is not just a physical arrangement, or a rational-functional arrangemen
t, but everything is experienced symbolically and reflects a meaning that
 cannot be reduced to the real or the rational.
 It is the product of a 'radical social imaginary'.
 And this imaginary though rooted in the past (through the symbolic meaning
 of institutions), is nevertheless a constitutive creation of mankind.
 Technology is just such a creation, a dimension of instituted society,
 that cannot be divorced from the other elements .
 In this context, peer to peer is the product of a newly arising radical
 social imaginary.
 Nevertheless, this does not mean that technology is not an important factor.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why is that? In a certain sense, peer to peer, understood as a form of participa
tion in the commons, i.e.
 as communal shareholding, which we discuss in section 3.4.C, has ‘always
 existed’ as a particular relational dynamic.
 It was especially strong in the more egalitarian tribal era, with its very
 limited division of labor, before the advent of property and class division.
 But it was always limited to small bands.
 After the tribal era, as we enter the long era of class-based civilization,
 forms of communal shareholding and egalitarian participation have survived,
 but always subvervient, first to the authority structures of feudalism
 and similar ‘land-based systems’, then to the ‘market pricing’ system of
 capitalism.
 But the situation is now different, because the development of P2P technology
 is an extraordinary vector for its generalization as a social practice,
 beyond the limitations of time and space, i.e.
 geographically bounded small bands.
 What we now have for the first time is a densely interconnected network
 of affinity-based P2P networks.
 Thus, the technological format that is now becoming dominant, is an essential
 part of a new feedback loop, which strengthens the emergence of P2P to
 a degree not seen since the demise of tribal civilization.
 It is in this particular way that the current forms of P2P are a historical
 novelty, and not simply a repeat of the tolerated forms of egalitarian
 participation in essentially hierarchical and authoritarian social orders.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To repeat: it is not the technology that causes P2P.
 Rather, as technology, it is itself an expression of a deep shift in the
 epistemology and ontology occurring in our culture.
 But nevertheless, this technology, once created, becomes an extraordinary
 amplifier of the existing shift.
 It allows a originally minoritarian cultural shift to eventually affect
 larger and larger numbers of people.
 Finally, that shift in our culture, is itself a function of the emergence
 of a field of abundance, the informational field, which is itself strongly
 related to the technological base that has helped its creation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To explain this argument, let us formulate this question of ‘why now?’,
 in a slightly different manner.
 Technology philosophers such as Marshall McLuhan (McLuhan, 1994) and others,
 have pointed out that technology is an ‘extension of our bodies’, or more
 precisely of the faculties of our bodies and minds.
 In a simplified way: tribal-era technologies, such as spears and arrows,
 reflect the extremeties of our limbs, the nails and fingers.
 Agricultural era technologies reflect the extension of our muscular system
 and the limbs proper: arms and legs.
 Industrial era technologies reflect our central body and its internal metabolic
 functions: the transformation of raw materials into more refined products
 that can be used by our body.
 Industrial economies are about producing, distributing and consuming physical
 products.
 But the information economy era is characterized by the externalization
 of our nervous system (telephone and telegraph) and our minds (computers),
 with a logic of first one-to-one communication technologies, then many
 to one (mass media), and finally with the internet and computer networks:
 many to many.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If we look at history in such a broad and large way, we can see P2P principles
 operating in the small bands of the tribal era.
 But as soon as society complexified itself through more and more elaborate
 division of labor, such was the complexity of organisation society, that
 it seemed to make more sense to create centralized institutions.
 According to system theorists, ‘fixed arrangements dramatically reduce
 transaction costs’.
 In a Darwinian sense, one could say that they could better manage information
 scarcity, so that a lesser number of players could rationalize the organisation
 of such complexity, through hierarchical formal rules.
 After the revolution of print, followed by the invention of electronic
 communication, and a dramatic lessening of information scarcity, we see
 a further integration of a more differentiated world system, and the emergence
 of a market, though within that market, it still made more sense to have
 larger and larger monopolistic players.
 With the advent of worldwide communication networks through, and before
 the internet these were a monopoly of the large companies, we see the occurrenc
e of major changes in organizational logic: a flattening of hierarchies.
 According to system theorists complex systems cannot themselves control
 there increasing number of ever-more efficient subunits, unless by granting
 them ever-more increasing functional autonomy.
 The larger system controls whether a subunit has carried a task, but no
 longer how it is carried out.
 Thus his law of ‘requisite hierarchy’ which states that the need for hierarchy
 diminishes in so far as the subunits increase their own capacity for control.
 And the 'law of requisite variety' of Arvid Aulin , which states that where
 internal controls or external regulation is absent, hierarchy is needed.
 Thus one of the keys to understand current processes is that communication
 technologies have enabled this kind of control and regulation to such a
 degree, as shown in P2P processes, that centralized command and control
 can in fact be overcome to a very great extent.
 Or more correctly, that the subunits become primary, down to the level
 of individual participants, who can now voluntarily defer to the subunit
 for minimal control of ‘what is produced’ (and no longer ‘how it is produced’),
 while the subunits to the same vis a vis the overall system.
 Within corporations P2P processes can only partially thrive, because they
 have to protect the profit motive, but outside the corporation, this limit
 can be overcome, and those processes of ‘production going outside the boundarie
s of the corporation’ are increasingly showing that the profit imperative,
 and the private appropriation of the social-cooperative processes, is becoming
 counter-productive.
 In a lot more simpler terms, let us then conclude that the development
 of information-processing capabilities has liberated cooperation from the
 constraints of time and space.
 Thus, while accepting the argument that P2P processes have always existed,
 but confined to small bands (or, it eventually emerged for very short periods
 in revolutionary situations only to be defeated by their then still more
 efficient authoritarian and centralized enemies), it is indeed ‘only now’,
 that such massive emergence of P2P is possible.
 We must thus inevitably conclude that technology <IS> a very important
 factor in this generalized emergence.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
3.
 P2P in the Economic Sphere
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
3.1.A.
 Peer production as a third mode of production
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are two important aspects to the emergence of P2P in the economic
 sphere.
 On the one hand, as format for peer production processes (called ‘Commons-based
 peer production' or CBPP by Y.
 Benckler ) it is emerging as a 'third mode of production' based on the
 cooperation of autonomous agents.
 Indeed, if the first mode of production is free-market based capitalism,
 and the second mode was the now defunct model of a centrally-planned state-owne
d economy, then the third mode is defined neither by the motor of profit,
 nor by any central planning.
 In order to allocate resources and make decisions, it is neither using
 market and pricing mechanisms, nor managerial commands, but social relations.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The second aspect, as the juridical underpinning of software creation, in
 the form of the General Public License, or as the Creative Commons license
 for other creative content, it is engendering a new commons-based intellectual
 property regime.
 Taken together the GPL, the Open Source Initiative and the Creative Commons,
 together with associated initiatives such as the Art Libre license, may
 be seen as providing the 'legal' infrastructure for the emergence and growth
 of the P2P social formation.
 Peer production proper covers the first aspect: freely cooperating producers,
 governing themselves through peer governance, and producing a new type
 of universal common goods.
 The second aspect, mostly as free software and open sources, is the result
 of that process, but not necessarily.
 It is possible that corporations would produce free software (accessible
 and modifiable for free), in a more traditional way, or in a hybrid way,
 now that many large corporations are embracing open sources, this is increasing
ly the case.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But what is important for us is the following: worldwide, groups of programmers
 and other experts are engaging in the cooperative production of immaterial
 goods with important use value, mostly new software systems, but not exclusivel
y.
 And as we will see later, peer production is much broader than software,
 it emerges thoughout the social field.
 The new software, hardware and other immaterial products thus being created
 are at the same time new means of production, since the computer is now
 a universal machine ‘in charge of everything’ (every productive action
 that can be broken down in logical steps can be directed by a computer).
 Access to computer technology is distributed, and thus widely affordable
 given a minimum of financial means, and technological literacy.
 This means that the old dichotomy, between workers and the means of production,
 is in the process of being overcome for certain areas of fixed capital,
 and that the emergence of the viral communicator model, technological meshworks
, is extending this model of distributed access to fixed capital assets,
 to more and more areas.
 Important to note is that software is 'active text' which directly results
 in 'processes'.
 In other words, software is not just an immaterial pursuit, but can actively
 direct material and industrial processes.
 As a cooperation format, we will discuss it in more detail in the section
 'Advantages of the peer production model'.
 Peer governance models will also be discussed elsewhere.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A further important aspect of peer production is the creation of universal
 public goods, i.e.
 the emergence of new common property regimes.
 As creation of a new type of commons, it takes the form of either the Free
 Software Movement ethos , as defined by Richard Stallman (Stallman, 2002
 ), or in the form of Open Source projects, as first defined by Eric Raymond
 (Raymond, 2001).
 Both are innovative developments of copyright that significantly transcend
 the implications of privaty property and its restrictions.
 However, the ethos underlying both initiatives is different, While the
 Free Software Foundation insists that its production is not for exchange
 on the market, and not to be converted into private property, the Open
 Source Iniative aims to be compatible with the market and business thinking
 and stresses the efficiency argument which results from a public domain
 of software.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Free software is essentially 'open code'.
 Its General Public Licence says that anyone using free software must give
 subsequent users at least the same rights as they themselves received:
 total freedom to see the code, to change it, to improve it and to distribute
 it .
 There is some discussion as to whether Free Software must be 'free', in
 the sense of free beer .
 While its spokesmen, including Richard Stallman, clearly say that it is
 okay to charge for such software, the obligation of free distribution makes
 this a rather moot argument.
 The companies that sell software, such as Red Hat, which sells version
 of Linux, could be said to charge for the services attached to its installation
 and use, rather than for the freely distributable software itself.
 This is an important argument for those stressing, as I do, the essential
 non-mercantile nature of free software.
 But in any case, if in a for-profit enterprise software is developed so
 that it can be sold as a product, in the case of free software, if it is
 sold by non-commercial entities or the programmers themselves, it is most
 often as a means of producing more software, to strengthen the community
 and obtain financial independence to continue further projects.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
FS explicitely rejects the ownership of software, since every user has the
 right to distribute the code, and to adapt it and is thus explicitely founded
 on a philosophy of participation and 'sharing'.
 Open Sources is admittedly less radical: it accepts ownership of software,
 but renders that ownership feeble since users and other developers have
 full right to use and change it .
 But since the OS model has been specifically designed to soften its acceptance
 by the business community which is now increasingly involved in its development
 , it generally leads to a lot more control of the labor process, including
 the use of traditional corporate processes.
 OS licenses allow segments of code to be used in proprietary and commercial
 projects, something impossible with pure free software.
 But even free software projects have become increasingly professionalised
 , and it now generally consists of a core of often paid professionals,
 funded by either nonprofits or by corporations having an interest in its
 continued expansion; they also use professional project management systems,
 as is the case for Linux.
 Despite their differences or essential likeness – a matter of continuous
 debate in both FS and OS communities -- I will use both concepts more for
 their underlying similarity, without my use denoting a preference, but
 on a personal level would be probably closer to the free software model,
 which is the 'purer' form of commons-based peer production.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Despite it rootedness as a modification of intellectual property rights,
 both do have the effect of creating a kind of public domain in software,
 and can be considered as part of the information commons .
 However, the GPL does that by completely preserving the authorship of its
 creators.
 Free software and open sources are exemplary of the double nature of peer
 to peer that we will discuss later: it is both within the system, but partly
 transcends it.
 Though it is increasingly attractive to economic forces for its efficiency,
 the profit motive is not the core of why these systems are taken up, it
 is much more about the use value of the products.
 You could say that they are part of a new 'for-benefit' sector, which also
 includes the NGO's, social entrepreneurs and what the Europeans call 'the
 social economy', and that is arising next to the 'for-profit' economy of
 private corporations.
 Studies show that the personal development of participants are primary
 motives, despite the fact that quite a few programmers are now paid for
 their efforts .
 Whatever the motives though, in a sense 'it doesn't matter' since in the
 open and global environment create by the internet, there is always a sufficien
t number of people willing to cooperate on any given project.
 Open Sources explicitely promotes itself through its value to create more
 efficient software in the business environment.
 It is even being embraced by corporate interests such as IBM and other
 Microsoft rivals, as a way to bypass the latter's monopoly, but the creation
 of an open infrastructure is clearly crucial and in everyone’s interest.
 But through the generalization of a cooperative mode of working , and through
 its overturning of the limits of property, which normally forbids other
 developers and users to study and ameliorate the source code, it is beyond
 the property model, contrary to the authoritarian, bureaucratic, or 'feudal'
 modes of corporate governance; and beyond the profit motive.
 We should also note that we have here the emergence of a mode of production
 that can be entirely devoid of a manufacturer .
 In the words of Doc Searls, senior editor of Linux magazine, we see the
 demand-side supplying itself .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In conclusion:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Seen from the point of view of capitalism or private for-profit interests,
 commons-based peer production has the following advantages : 1) it represents
 more productive ways of working and of mobilizing external communities
 to its own purposes ; 2) it represents a means of externalizing costs or
 of lowering transaction costs ; 3) it represents new types of business
 models based on 'customer-made production', such as eBay and Amazon; 4)
 it represents new service-based business models, where by free software
 is used as the basis of providing surrounding services (Red Hat); 5) it
 represents a common shared infrastructure whose costs and building is taken
 up largely by the community and which prohibits both monopolistic control
 by stronger rivals as well as providing common standards so that a market
 can develop around it.
 In all these senses FS/OS forms of peer production are 'within the system'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We should also stress the dependence of the peer production community to
 the existing system.
 Since producers are not paid for their services, they have to work within
 the mainstream economy: for the government or academia, for traditional
 corporations, running their own individual or small business, or moving
 from project to project.
 Thus, despite its growth, peer production is still relatively weak.
 Though it outcompetes its for-profit rivals in efficiency, though it increases
 the welfare of its producers, though it creates important use value, it
 only covers part of the economy, mostly immaterial processes, while the
 mainstream, capitalist economy, functions as a full system.
 In this sense, peer to peer is immanent in the system, and productive of
 capitalism itself, as we have shown in the first chapter.
 But it is also more than that, a transcendent element that goes beyond
 the larger system of which it is a part.
 It is a germ of something new: it still goes 'beyond' the existing system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To summarise the importance of the 'transcending' factors of Commons-based
 peer production: 1) it is based on free cooperation, not on the selling
 of one's labour in exchange of a wage, nor motivated primarily by profit
 or for the exchange value of the resulting product; 2) it not managed by
 a traditional hierarchy, but through new modes of peer governance; 3) it
 does not need a manufacturer; 4) it's an innovative application of copyright
 which creates an information commons and transcends the limitations attached
 to both the private (for-profit) and public (state-based) property forms.
 It creates a new type of universal common property.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How widespread are these developments? Open-source based computers are already
 the mainstay of the internet’s infrastructure (Apache servers); Linux is
 an alternative operating system that is taking the world by storm .
 It is now a practical possibility to operating system that is taking the
 world by storm .
 It is now a practical possibility to create an Open Source personal computer
 that exclusively uses OS software products for the desktop, including database,
 accounting, graphical programs, including browsers such as Firefox .
 It is recognized as its main threat by the current operating system monopoly
 Microsoft .
 As a collaborative method to produce software, it is being used increasingly
 by various businesses and institutions .
 Wikipedia is an alternative encyclopedia produced by the internet community
 which is rapidly gaining in quantity, quality, and number of users.
 And there are several thousands of such projects, involving at least several
 millions of cooperating individuals.
 If we consider blogging as a form of journalistic production, then it must
 be noted that it already involves between 5 and 10 million bloggers, with
 the most popular ones achieving several hundred thousands of visitors.
 We are pretty much in an era of ‘open source everything’, with musicians
 and other artists using it as well for collaborative online productions.
 In general it can be said that this mode of production achieves ‘products’
 that are at least as good, and often better than their commercial counterparts.
 In addition, there are solid reasons to accept that, if the open source
 methodology is consistently used over time, the end result can only be
 better alternatives, since they involved mobilization of vastly most resources
 than commercial products.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Open source production operates in a wider economic context, of which we
 would like to describe ‘the communism of capital’, with ‘the hacker ethic’
 functioning as the basis of it’s new work culture.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
3.1.B.
 The Communism of Capital, or, the cooperative nature of cognitive capitalism
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In modernity, the economic ideology sees autonomous individuals entering
 into contracts with each other, selling labor in exchange for wages, exchanging
 commodities for fair value, in a free market where the ‘invisible hand’
 makes sure that the private selfish economic aims of such individuals,
 finally contribute to the common good.
 The ‘self’ or subject of economic action is the company, led by entrepreneurs,
 who are the locus of innovation.
 Thus we have the familiar subject/object split operating in the economic
 sphere, with an autonomous subject using and manipulating resources.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This view is hardly defensible today.
 The autonomous enterprise has entered a widely participative field that
 blurs clear distinctions and identities.
 Innovation has become a very diffuse process .
 It is linked with its consumers through the internet, today facing less
 a militant labor movement than a ‘political consumer’ who can withhold
 his/her buying power with an internet and blogosphere able to damage corporate
 images and branding in the very short term through viral explosions of
 critique and discontent.
 It is linked through extranets with partners and suppliers.
 Processes are no longer internally integrated, as in the business process
 re-engineering of the eighties, but externally integrated in vast webs
 of inter-company cooperation.
 Intranets enable widespread horizontal cooperation not only for the workers
 within the company, but also without.
 Thus, the employee, is in constant contact with the outside, part of numerous
 innovation and exchange networks, constantly learning in formal but mostly
 informal ways.
 Because of the high degree of education and the changing nature of work
 which has become a series of short-term contracts, a typical worker has
 not in any real sense gained his essential skills and experience within
 the company that he is working for at any particular moment, but expands
 on his skill and experience throughout his working life.
 Innovation today is essentially 'socialized' and takes place 'before' productio
n, or 'after' production, with reproduction being at marginal cost concerning
 immaterial goods, and even if costly in the material sphere, being just
 an execution of the design phase .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Moreover, because the complexity, time-based, innovation-dependent nature
 of contemporary work, for all practical terms, work is organized as a series
 of teams, using mostly P2P work processes.
 In fact, as documented very convincingly by Eric von Hippel, in his book
 "The Democratization of Innovation" (Von Hippel, 2004), innovation by users
 (and particularly by what he calls 'lead users' ) is becoming the most
 important driver of innovation, more so than internal market research and
 R & D divisions.
 It is subverting one of the mainstays of the division of labor.
 Commentators have noted that the whole dichotomy between professionals
 and amateurs are in fact dissolving, giving rise to the phenomena of 'citizen
 engineers' .
 Users, better than the scientists, know what they need and now have the
 skills to develop solutions for themselves, using other users for peer
 support .
 These user innovation communities are very important in the world of extreme
 sports such as windsurfing for example , in technology and online music
 , and in an increasing number of other areas.
 Recently, in May 2005, Trendwatching.com, a business-oriented innovation
 newsletter using thousands of spotters worldwide, has devoted a whole issue
 to the topic of 'Customer-made innovation', highlighting several dozen
 examples in all sectors of the economy.
 These trends will be greatly strengthened with the further development
 of 'personal fabricator' technology.
 But even before this, the process of creating an infrastructure for this
 type of do-it-yourself economy is proceeding apace .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The smarter companies are therefore consciously breaking down the barriers
 between production and consumption, producers and consumers, by involving
 consumers, sometimes in a explicit open-source inspired manner, into value
 creation .
 Think of how the success of eBay and Amazon are linked to their successful
 mobilization of their user communities: they are in fact integrating many
 aspects of commons-based peer production.
 There are of course important factors, inherent in the functioning of capitalis
m and the format of the enterprise, which cause structural tensions around
 this participative nature, and the use of P2P models, which we will cover
 in our explanatory section .
 The same type of user-driven innovation has also been noted in advertising
 .
 Accordingly, new business management theories are needed, which Thomas
 Malone calls "Coordination Theory", and it involves studying (and organizing
 accordingly) the dependencies and relationships within and without the
 enterprise .
 Not surprisingly this research into 'organizational physics' is also done
 through open source methods .
 Apart from 'vanguard corporations' (see my thesis on netarchical capitalism)
 that incorporate peer production as an essential component of their activities,
 there is a broad shift towards a new attitude towards consumers, with many
 associated phenomena.
 Management theorists with a feeling for these trends argue that a radical
 shift is occurring, and needs to occur, in the managerial class, in order
 to be able to capitalize on these developments.
 David Rotman of the Rotman School of Management argues that they have to
 become businesspeople will have to become "more 'masters of heuristics'
 than 'managers of algorithms'" .
 Books describing this shift are Daniel Pink's A Whole New Mind: Moving
 from the Information Age to the Conceptual Age, and C.K.
 Prahalad's The Future of Competition: Co-Creating Unique Value with Customers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So the general conclusion of all the above has to be the essentially cooperative
 nature of production, the fact that companies are drawing on this vast
 reservoir of a 'commons of general intellectuality', without which they
 could not function.
 That innovation is diffused throughout the social body.
 That, if we accept John Locke's argument that work that adds value should
 be rewarded, then it makes sense to reward the cooperative body of humankind,
 and not just individuals and entrepreneurs.
 All this leads quite a few social commentators, from both left and liberal
 (free enterprise advocates), to bring the issue of the universal wage on
 the agenda and to retrieve the early Marxian notion of the 'General Intellect'
 .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why do we speak of ‘cognitive capitalism’? For a number of important reasons:
 the relative number of workers involved in material production is dwindling
 rather rapidly, with a majority of workers in the West involved in either
 symbolic (knowledge workers) or affective processing (service sector) and
 creation (entertainment industry).
 The value of any product is mostly determined, not by the value of the
 material resources, but by its level of integration of intelligence, and
 of other immaterial factors (design, creativity, experiential intensity,
 access to lifeworlds and identities created by brands).
 The immaterial nature of contemporary production is reconfiguring the material
 production of agricultural produce and industrial goods.
 In terms of professional ‘experience’, more and more workers are not directly
 manipulating matter, but the process is mediated through computers that
 manage machine-based processes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But the most important argument as to the existence of a third phase of
 Cognitive capitalism is therefore a hypothesis that the current phase of
 capitalism is distinct in its operations and logic from earlier forms such
 as merchant and industrial capitalism .
 It is based on the accumulation of essentially knowledge assets.
 Instead of the cycle conception-production-distribution-consumption, we
 have a new cycle conception – reproduction of the informational core –
 production – distribution.
 The key is now to possess an informational advantage, in the form of intellectu
al property, and that can be embedded in immaterial (software, content)
 or material (seeds, pharmaceuticals, biotechnology) products.
 The production itself can be outsourced and is no longer central to competitive
 advantage.
 And because the advantage is in the information, it is protected through
 monopolies, enforced by the state.
 This in turn leads to increasing and protected profits, with prices no
 longer bearing any necessary relation to the production cost.
 This fact is true for seeds, pharmaceuticals, software, content products,
 biotechnology, etc… These inflated profits in turn have put an enormous
 pressure on the totality of the economy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
According to the hypothesis of cognitive capitalism, there are three main
 approaches in analyses of the current political economy:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
‘neo-classical economics’ seeks for the laws of capitalism ‘as such’, and
 is today much involved in creating models and mathematizing them; according
 to CC theorists, it lacks a historical model to take into account the changes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Information economy models claim that information/knowledge has become a
 independent third factor of production, changing the very nature of our
 economy, making it ‘post-capitalist’
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
In between is the hypothesis of cognitive capitalism, which, though it recognize
s that we have entered a new phase, a third ‘cognitive’ phase, it is still
 within the framework of the capitalist system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What CC-researchers are building on is an earlier and still very powerful
 school of economic theory, known as the Regulation School and especially
 strong in France (M.
 Aglietta), which considers that, despite differences in national models,
 there are commonalities in the structural evolution of the capitalist system,
 that it has been characterized by different ‘regimes’ which each had their
 particular modes of ‘regulation’ (forms of balancing the inherent instability
 of the system).
 It was they, who focused most on the theories of post-Fordism, arguing
 that after 1973, the Taylorist-Fordist system of organizing work and the
 economy (with as its corollary Keynesianism) had been replaced by new systems
 of organizing work and regulating the economy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
McKenzie Wark’s Hacker Manifesto (Wark, 2004) goes one step further in this
 analysis and argues that not only is the key factor of the new era ‘information
 as property’, but with it comes the creation of a new ruling class and
 a new class configuration altogether.
 While the capitalist class owned factories and machinery, once capital
 was abstracted in the form of stocks and information, a new class has arisen
 which controls the ‘vectors of information’, the means of producing, storing
 and distributing information, the means to transform use value in exchange
 value.
 This is the new social force he calls the ‘vectoralist’ class.
 The class who actually produces the value (as distinct from the class that
 can ‘realise’ it and thus captures the surplus value), he calls the hacker
 class.
 It is distinguished from the former because it actually creates new means
 of production: hardware, software, new knowledge (wetware).
 See 3.3.D.
 for a fuller explanation of the different interpretations of the current
 political economy, of which P2P is a crucial element.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
However, we believe that though the cognitive capitalism and vectoralist
 class arguments are key to understand the current era, it is not sufficient,
 and we will put forward our own hypothesis that will help in understand
 the emerging future: the emergence of a netarchical class, which is not
 dependent on either knowledge assets or information vectors, but enables
 and exploits the networks of participatory culture.
 See section 3.4.E.
 for a full explanation of this idea.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
3.1.C.
 The Hacker Ethic or ‘work as play’
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In section 3.2 we will attempt to show the contradictory nature of the relationsh
ip between capitalism and peer to peer processes.
 It needs P2P to thrive, but is at the same threatened by it.
 A similar contradiction takes place in the sphere of work.
 We said before how in the industrial, ‘Fordist’ model, the worker was considere
d an extension of the machine.
 Another way of saying this, is that intelligence was located in the process,
 but that the worker himself was deskilled, he was required to be a ‘dumb
 body’, following instructions.
 The worker had to sell his labor in order to survive, and meaning could
 only be found in the activity of working itself, as a means of survival
 for the family, as a way of social integration, as a means of obtaining
 identity through one’s social role.
 But finding meaning in the content of the work itself was exceptional.
 In post-Fordism important changes and reversals occur .
 Today, the worker is supposed to communicate and cooperate, to have a capacity
 to solve problems.
 He is required not only to use his intelligence, but also has to engage
 his full subjectivity.
 Certainly this increases the possibility to find fulfillment and meaning
 through work, but that would be to paint a too rosy picture.
 Inside the company, the quest for fulfillment is often contradicted by
 the empty purpose of the company itself, especially as efficiency thinking,
 short termism and a sole focus on profit, are taking hold as the main prioritie
s .
 Peer to peer processes characteristic of the project teams are in tension
 with the hierarchical, feudal-like nature of the management by objectives
 models , whose 'information scarcity'-based model is becoming counterproductive
 even on capital's own terms .
 Psychological pressure and stress levels are very high, since the worker
 has now full responsibility and very high targets.
 One could say that instead of exploiting the body of the worker, as was
 the case in industrial capitalism, it is now the psyche being exploited,
 and stress-related diseases have replaced industrial accidents.
 But this is not all: the productivity model and modes of efficiency thinking
 have left the factory to diffuse throughout society.
 It is not uncommon to manage one’s family and children and household according
 to that model.
 Dual-career parents come home tired and stressed to children that have
 spent their day time in institutions since their very early age and have
 little occasion to spend 'quality time' together; and are managed (or manage
 themselves) like 'human resources' in a very competitive environment.
 An increasing number of human relations (such as dating) and creative activitie
s have been commoditized and monetized.
 As the pressure within the corporate time sphere intensifies through the
 hyper competition based model of neoliberalism, learning and other necessary
 activities to remain creative and efficient at work have been exported
 to private time.
 Thus paradoxically, the Protestant work ethic has been exacerbated, or
 as Pekka Himanen (Himanen,2001) would have it in his Hacker Ethic , there
 has been a ‘Friday-isation of Sunday’ going on.
 In other words, the values and practices of the productive sphere, the
 sphere of the workweek including Friday, defined by efficiency, have taken
 over the private sphere, the sphere of the weekend, Sunday, which was supposed
 to be outside of that logic.
 But even within the corporate sphere itself, these developments have lead
 to a widespread dissatisfaction of the workforce.
 Interesting work is being done in investigating the new forms of network
 sociality, as for example by Andreas Wittel, but he also writes that this
 form of sociality, which he contrasts with community , is geared to the
 creation and protection of proprietary information.
 This is in sharp contrast with the Peer to Peer sociality, and thus, focuses
 on the exacerbation of the Protestant work ethic, and its cultural effects,
 rather than on the reaction against it.
 Similarly, Pekka Himanen will not distinguish between the entrepreneurs
 and the knowledge workers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And this is precisely the important hypothesis of a Peer to Peer sociality:
 new subjectivities and intersubjectivities (which we will discuss later),
 are creating a counter-movement in the form of a new work ethic: the hacker
 ethic (see also Kane, 2003).
 As mass intellectuality increases through formal and informal education,
 and due to the very requirements of the new types of immaterial work, meaning
 is no longer sought in the sphere of salaried work, but in life generally,
 and not through entertainment alone, but through creative expression, through
 ‘work’, but outside of the monetary sphere.
 Occasionally, and it was especially the case during the new economy boom,
 companies try to integrate such methods, the so-called ‘Bohemian’ model.
 This explains to a large part the rise of the Open Sources production method.
 In the interstices of the system, between jobs, on the job when there is
 free time, in academic circles, or supported by social welfare, new use
 value is being created.
 Or more recently, by rival IT companies who are understanding the efficiency
 of the model and seeing it as a way to break the monopoly of Microsoft
 software.
 But it is done through a totally new work ethic, which is opposed to the
 exacerbation of the Protestant work ethic.
 And as it was first pioneered by the community of ‘passionate programmers,
 the so-called hackers, it is called ‘the hacker ethic’.
 Himanen (Himanen, 2004) explains a few of its characteristics :
\end_layout

\begin_layout Quote
"time is not rigidly separated into work and non-work; intensive work periods
 are followed by extensive leave taking, the latter necessary for intellectual
 and creative renewal; there is a logic of self-unfolding at work, workers
 look for projects at which they feel energized and that expands their learning
 and experience in desired directions; participation is voluntary; learning
 is informal and continuous; the value of pleasure and play are crucial;
 the project has to have social value and be of use to a wider community;
 there is total transparency, no secrets; there is an ethic that values
 activity and caring; creativity, the continuous surpassing of oneself in
 solving problems and creating new use value, is paramount"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In open source projects, these characteristics are fully present; in a for-profi
t environment they may be partly present but enter into conflict with the
 different logic of a for-profit enterprise.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
3.2 Explaining the Emergence of P2P Economics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
3.2.A.
 Advantages of the free software/open sources production model
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why is are free cooperative projects of autonomous agents, i.e.
 peer production models, emerging now? Part of the explanation is cultural,
 located in a changing set of values affecting large parts of the population,
 mostly in the Western world.
 The World Values research by R.
 Inglehart (Inglehart, 1989) has shown that there is a large number of people
 who identify with post-material values and who have moved up in the ‘hierarchy
 of values’ as defined by Abraham Maslow.
 For those people who feel relatively secure materially, and are not taken
 in by the infinite desires promoted by consumer society, it is inevitable
 that they will look to other means of fulfillment, in the area of creation,
 relationships, spirituality.
 The demand for free cooperation in a context of self-unfolding of the individua
l, is a corollary of this development.
 Just as the development of filesharing is related to the existence of an
 abundance of unused computing resources due to the differential between
 computer processing and human processing (the fact that the latter is much
 slower creates the abundance in PC-resources), P2P as a cultural phenomena
 is strongly related to the development of a mass intellectually and the
 resulting abundance in creative resources.
 Not only underemployment of these resources, but also the growing dearth
 of meaning associated with working for a consumption-oriented corporation,
 creates a surplus of creative labor that wants to invest in meaningful
 projects associated with the direct creation of use value.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Apart from these cultural and 'subjective' reasons, there is of course the
 availability of a global technological framework for non-local communication,
 coordination and cooperation, it is strongly linked to the emergence of
 the Internet.
 As we have outlined in our introduction, there is now a peer to peer infrastruc
ture available through distributed computing, an alternative media and communica
tion infrastructure, and a platform for global autonomous cooperation.
 In general we can say that it is access to distributed capital goods, that
 allows for the generation of bottom-up ad hoc networks of people and devices.
 This fact that 'capital outlays' can be generated without recourse to access
 to financial capital or the means provided by the state or corporations,
 is itself a huge advantage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are other good objective reasons that drive the adoption of 'open
 collaborative processes: the very 'diffuse' nature of contemporary innovation
 works against individual appropriation, since there are myriads of inputs
 necessary to produce a given output, and were that output to be frozen
 through rigid intellectual protection, it would stifle the innovation process,
 and put these entities at a competitive disadvantage .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
By abolishing distinctions between producer and consumer, open source processes
 dramatically increase their access to expertise, to a global arena networked
 through the internet.
 No commercial entity can afford such a large army of volunteers.
 So one very clear advantage is the availability of a much larger pool of
 intelligence which can be devoted to problem-solving.
 Peer production, though often taken place through a large number of small
 teams, also allows for swarming tactics, i.e.
 the coordinated attention of many people.
 It is sometimes called the 'piranha effect' as it involves repeated tugging
 of code or text by many different people, until the result is 'right' and
 communally validated.
 Commercial software, which forbids other developers and users from ameliorating
 it, is much more static in its development and has many other flaws .
 With FLOSS (=Free Libre Open Sources Software) projects, any user can participa
te, at least through a bug report, or by offering his comments.
 This 'flexible degree of involvement' is a very important characteristic
 of commons-based peer production, which usually combine a very motivated
 core who operate in a onion-like structure surrounded by, a flexible periphery
 of co-developers and occasional collaborators, with many degrees in between,
 and all have the possibility of permanently 'modulating' their contributions
 for optimal fit in their personal contexts.
 Indeed, because the cooperation is free, participants function passionately
 and optimally without coercion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The ‘Wisdom Game’, which means that social influence is gained through reputatio
n, augments the motivation to participate with high quality interventions.
 In surveys of participants of such projects, the most frequently cited
 motivation is the writing of the code itself, i.e.
 the making of the software, and the associated ‘learning’ .
 Because a self-unfolding logic is followed which looks for optimal feeling
 of flow, the participants are collaborating when they feel most energized.
 Open source availability of the source code and documentation means that
 the products can be continuously improved.
 Because of the social control and the reputation game, abusive behavior
 can be controlled and abuse of power is similarly dependent on collective
 approval.
 Eric Raymond has summarized the advantages of peer production in his seminal
 The Cathedral and the Bazaar: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
programmers motivated by real problems work better than salary men who do
 not freely choose their area of work; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
"good programmers can write, but great programmers can rewrite", the latter
 is greatly accelerated by the availability of open code; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
more users can see more bugs, the number of collaborators and available
 brainpower is several orders of magnitude greater; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
continuous multiple corrections hasten development, while version control
 permits falling back on earlier versions in case of instability of the
 new version; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
the Internet allowed global cooperation to occur.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the sphere of immaterial production and distribution, such as for example
 the distribution of music, the advantages of online distribution through
 P2P processes are unmatched.
 In the sphere of material production, through essentially the contributions
 of knowledge workers, similarly P2P processes are more efficient than centraliz
ed hierarchical control.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Yochai Benkler, in a famous essay, ‘Coase’s Penguin’, has given a rationale
 for the emergence of P2P production methodologies, based on the ideas of
 ‘transaction costs’.
 In the physical world, the cost of bringing together thousands of participants
 may be very high, and so it may be cheaper to have centralized firms than
 an open market.
 This is why earlier experiences with collectivized economies could not
 work.
 But in the immaterial sphere used for the production of informational goods,
 the transaction goods are near-zero and therefore, open source production
 methods are cheaper and more efficient.
 The example of Thinkcycle , where open source methods are used for a large
 number of projects, such as fighting cholera, show a wide applicability
 of the method.
 Open source methods have already been applied with a certain success in
 the biotechnogical field and is being proposed as an alternative in an
 increasing number of new areas .
 An interesting twist on the transaction cost theory of Yochai Benkler is
 given by Clay Shirky, who explains the role of 'mental transaction costs'
 in the 'economy of attention', which to a large degree, explains the phenomenon
 of 'gratuity' in internet publishing, and why payment schemes, including
 micropayment, are so ineffective.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Aaron Krowne, writing for Free Software magazine, has proposed a set of
 laws to explain the higher efficiency of CBPP (= Commons-based peer production)
 models:
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
(Law_1.) When positive contributions exceed negative contributions by a sufficien
t factor in a CBPP project, the project will be successful.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This means that for every contributor that can ‘mess things up’, there have
 to be at least 10 others who can correct these mistakes.
 But in most projects the ration is 1 to 100 or 1 to 1000, so that quality
 can be maintained and improved over time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
(Law_2.) Cohesion quality is the quality of the presentation of the concepts
 in a collaborative component (such as an encyclopedia entry).
 Assuming the success criterion of Law 1 is met, cohesion quality of a component
 will overall rise.
 However, it may temporarily decline.
 The declines are by small amounts and the rises are by large amounts.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Individual contributions which may be useful by themselves but diminish
 the overall balance of the project, will always be discovered, so that
 decline can only be temporary.
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
(Corollary.) Laws 1 and 2 explain why cohesion quality of the entire collection
 (or project) increases over time: the uncoordinated temporary declines
 in cohesion quality cancel out with small rises in other components, and
 the less frequent jumps in cohesion quality accumulate to nudge the bulk
 average upwards.
 This is without even taking into account coverage quality, which counts
 any conceptual addition as positive, regardless of the elegance of its
 integration.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
3.2.B.
 How far can peer production be extended?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Given that open source is predicated on abundance, how far can it be extended
 into the material economy, and leave its confinement in the field of pure
 immaterial production, such as software? One of the great advocates of
 peer production, Yochai Benkler, who has focused his explanations of its
 success to the dramatic lowering of transactions costs, squarely places
 peer production within the limits of immaterial production, but doesn’t
 see an expansion beyond that, explicitely stating that it will not endanger
 capitalist markets .
 I take a much more expansive view, because of the ‘transcending’ factors
 that I have mentioned repeatedly, and because I believe that human intentionali
ty in favour of participation, will pressure social structures into an expansion
 of the sphere of peer production.
 But I do agree that there are limits to this expansion.
 How can we view such a possibility?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If peer to peer is predicated on abundance, we have to know what it is that
 is abundant, and what is it that is scarce.
 Information and knowledge are immaterial goods with zero reproduction costs
 and they are non-rival goods: if I take your sandwich, you have nothing
 to eat, it is a rival good, but if I copy a song from your computer to
 mine, we both have the song.
 This is why we have to resist the ‘Second Enclosure’ movement, which aims
 to create artificial scarcity in knowledge goods, while the open source
 movement and the GPL license creates the opposite: a guaranteed abundant
 knowledge commons.
 Many natural raw materials are rival goods, or they are rival ‘generationally’,
 i.e.
 they take time to regrow if you take from them.
 But our productive capacities have become abundant.
 It is here that we have to take a good look at the current ‘protocol’ of
 our societies: money for example, to abundantly available for speculative
 purposes, is too scarce where it is needed .
 In fact, money is kept artificially scarce .
 Financial capital is scarce because it is concentrated in too few hands.
 It is important to see that such scarcity is not objective, but contigent
 to the present social, political and economic organization of society.
 In other words, it doesn’t have to be that way.
 In fact, there are various initiatives aimed at creating the possibility
 of a non-scarcity based monetary system, based on either general reform
 of the ‘protocol’ of money, or on bottom-up systems of complementary currency
 systems.
 The most radical proposals involve p2p-based ‘open money’ systems .
 One of the historical precedents showing that such reform is not utopian
 is the existence of ‘brakteaten’ money in Europe between the 12th and 15th
 centuries, a period of sustained growth within a system on non-accumulable
 money .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, let us recast the question with those distinctions in mind: how far
 can peer production be extended to the sphere of ‘material production’.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first important aspect of material production is the immaterial design
 phase.
 The whole process of design is immaterial and by definition in the sphere
 of abundance.
 Making a car today is highly, essentially dependent on the immaterial factors
 such as design, cooperation of dispersed international teams, marketing
 and communication.
 After that, the production of the cars through standardized parts in outsourced
 production companies, is -- despite the capital requirement -- more of
 an epiphenomenon.
 It is therefore not extremely difficult to expect an extension of OS production
 models, at least in the design and conception phase of even material production.
 We can envisage a future form of society, as described in the GPL (General
 Public License) Society scenario of Oekonux , where the intellectual production
 and design of any material product, is done through P2P processes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The second important aspect of material production is the high capital cost
 of such physical production.
 At present, with a “scarce money
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 system and the concentration of financial resources, this severly restricts
 the expansion of P2P modes.
 However, if we would succeed in created distributed forms of capital, in
 the context of current financial abundance, it is likely that peer production
 would expand significantly.
 More pragmatically, and already ‘realisable’ at present, one could imagine
 the extension of models such as Zopa, a distributed bank where lenders
 and borrowers can pool resources.
 In such user-capitalized models, peer groups would more easily find access
 to needed capital resources.
 This is not an utopian scheme, as there are an increasing number of examples.
 The new generation of viral meshworks, are 'user-constituted' or 'user-capitali
zed'.
 Skype did not built an infrastructure, instead it is the spare capacity
 of the user's computers that creates the network.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important aspect of any transitional period between the present limits
 on peer production and a possible future expansion, would be the introduction
 of the basic income .
 A basic income would significantly increase the freedom of producers to
 choose periodically for more intensive involvement in peer production processes.
 Capitalism is based on dependency: it separated producers from productive
 resources, so that producers have to sell their labor in exchange for a
 salary.
 A basic income, i.e.
 an income divorced from any linkage to work, and given to every citizen,
 would be a crucial means to diminish such dependence and to free many more
 producers to choose for peer production models.
 There are many justifications and critiques of the basic income scheme,
 which we will discuss later, but peer production gives a new an added rationale
 to it: as a means to fund the more efficient peer production and to create
 an enormous extension of use value creation in society.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finally, the state, might consider writing out competitive bids for crucial
 technologies, where non-corporate entities could participate, at least
 for the design phase.
 If the state were a neutral, or even commons-friendly institution, it would
 not systematically favor corporate welfare or state ownership, but would
 also fund, where appropriate and more productive, peer production modes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the above paragraphs, we looked at peer production in its most complete
 definition: free cooperating producers working on common projects that
 are freely available to all.
 Let’s now look to the more limited partial aspects of peer to peer, such
 as the cooperation enabled by its technological infrastructure and software
 tools.
 As such practices brings down transactional costs, we can see how it can
 enable an extension of gift economy practices (such as Local Exchange Trading
 Networks), or what Yochai Benkler calls 'the Sharing Economy' and involves
 the sharing of physical assets such as cars (car pooling in the U.S.
 got a great boost from the web, for example).
 It will also enable many sites that bring together supply and demand, whether
 it is organized by for-profit companies, or by autonomous collectives.
 As a form of management, open sources methodologies are being taken up
 'inside' companies, especially those joining the Open Source bandwagon,
 such as IBM (at least their own contributions to OS projects have to be
 managed in a similar fashion).
 Given the success and quality deliverance of many FLOSS projects, companies
 will look at how to emulate such processes in their own environment.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In any case, there are now a great variety of areas, where open source modeled
 methodologies are being used, a case in point being Thinkcycle, " a Web-based
 industrial-design project that brings together engineers, designers, academics,
 and professionals from a variety of disciplines" Similar projects are CollabNet
 and Innocentive .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In conclusion: we have seen how peer production is entirely appropriate
 for non-rival and abundant knowledge production; that cooperative peer
 modes of working are being taken up in the traditional for-profit economy;
 and that forms of sharing are expanding wherever a context of abundant
 and distributed capital can be achieved.
 We have also examined the theoretical arguments of why peer production
 could be expanded even further, given a number of reforms in the political
 economy.
 But peer production is not a cure all and will continue to co-exist with
 other modes of production.
 In our opinion, it should co-exist within the context of a reformed market,
 an expansion of reciprocity-based gift economy practices, and a state form
 that has integrated new forms of peer governance and multistakeholdership.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The continued overuse of biosphere resources, and it seems we annually are
 consuming 20% than nature's ability to regenerate them, leads to a likely
 scenario of depletion and scarcity.
 At some point, it is likely that we will have to switch from a growth economy
 model, to a 'throughput economy' model, i.e.
 the steady-state economics described by Herman Daly, where output will
 not exceed input.
 Such a no-growth model is incompatible with contemporary capitalism, but
 might be compatible with 'natural capitalism' models, or gift economy models.
 Markets by themselves are not predicated on endless growth, only capitalism
 is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Even within the sphere of abundant information and knowledge, continued
 expansion of P2P is not guaranteed.
 As McKenzie Wark (Wark, 2004) explains, information might be abundant,
 but in order for it to be accessed and distributed, we need vectors, i.e.
 the means of production and distribution of information.
 And these are not in the hands of the producers themselves, but in the
 hands of a vectoral class.
 Use value cannot be transformed into exchange value, without their intervention.
 At the same time, through intellectual property laws, this vectoral class
 is in the process of trying to make information scarce.
 For Wark, the key issue is the property form, as it is the property form,
 and nothing else, which renders resources scarce.
 However, the natural abundance of information, the peer to peer nature
 of vectors such as the internet, makes this a particularly hard task for
 the vectoral class.
 Unlike the working class in industrial capitalism, knowledge workers can
 resist and create to numerous interstices, which is where true P2P is thriving.
 Their natural task is to extend free access to information, to have a commons
 of vectoral resources; while the natural task of the vectoral class, is
 to control the vectors, and change the information commons into tightly
 controlled properties.
 But at the same time, the vectoral class needs the knowledge workers (or
 the hacker class, as McKenzie Wark puts it), to produce innovation, and
 in the present regime, in many cases, the knowledge workers need the vectors
 to distribute its work.
 In our own related hypothesis of the emergence of a netarchical class,
 which enables and exploits the networks of participatory culture, i.e.
 the needed platforms for collaboration, a similar tension occurs, since
 for-profit companies will tend to want to achieve dominance and monopoly
 and rig the platforms in their favor.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the reason that relations between P2P and the for-profit model of
 the enterprise are highly contradictory and rife with tensions.
 P2P-inspired project teams have to co-exist with a hierarchical framework
 that seeks only to serve the profit of the shareholders.
 The authority model of a corporation is essentially a top-down hierarchical
 even ‘feudal’ model.
 Since traditionally corporate power was a scarce resource predicated on
 information control, very few companies are ready to actually implement
 coherent P2P models and their inherent demand for an information sharing
 culture, as it threatens the core power structure.
 By their own nature, companies seek to exploit external resources, at the
 lowest possible cost, and seek to dump waste products to the environment.
 They seek to give the lowest possible socially-accepted wage, which is
 sufficient to attract workers.
 Mitigating factors are the demands and regulations of the democratic polity,
 and today in particular the demands of the political consumer; and the
 strength and scarcity of labor.
 But essentially, the corporation will be reactive to these demands, not
 pro-active.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
P2P is, as we will argue throughout the different sections of this book,
 always both ‘within’ and ‘beyond’ the present system.
 It is within because it is the condition for the functioning of the present
 system of ‘cognitive capitalism’.
 But P2P, if it follows its own logic, demands to be extended to the full
 sphere of material and social life, and demands its transformation from
 a scarce resource, predicated on private property to an abundant resource.
 Therefore, ultimately, the answer to the question: can P2P be extended
 to the material sphere, should have the following reply: only if the material
 sphere is liberated from its connection to scarce capital, and instead
 starts functioning on the predicate of over-abundant and non-mediated labor,
 will it effectively function outside the immaterial sphere.
 Thus P2P points to the eventual overcoming of the present system of political
 economy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
3.3 Placing the P2P Era in an evolutionary framework
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
3.3.A.
 The evolution of cooperation: from neutrality to synergetics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this section, we want to look at the basic characteristics of the evolution
 of the mode of production , and in particular, how this different forms
 tackle cooperation.
 It is perhaps useful to distinguish the general concept of coordination
 , which does not involve people cooperating together, but people working
 individidually in a chain, being coordination through hierarchy or technology.
 With cooperation we mean: working together and the following is an attempted
 history of the modalities of such 'working together'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The primary economy is based on reciprocity, which derives from common ancestry
 or lineage.
 It is based on families, clans, tribes and exchange mostly operates through
 gifts which create further obligation.
 The division of labor is minimal and most often related to gender and age.
 The key question is 'to belong or not to belong'.
 Social groups are based and bounded by real or symbolic lineage.
 Wants are defined by the community.
 Leadership is in the hands of the lineage leadership.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The secondary economy arises together with power monopolies which engender
 coercion as a means to force cooperation.
 We enter the domain of class societies, and production is organized by
 the elite in power, which holds together through the symbolic power which
 transforms power into allegiance.
 Respect for power, in the form of tribute, taxes, etc..
 is normative.
 Distribution depends on your place in this chain of symbolic power.
 Wants are defined by the symbolic power with symbolic markers monopolized.
 The key question is: 'to deserve power or to deserve subjection'.
 Social groups are bound by allegiance to power.
 Leadership is political and religious.
 Relationships, i.e.
 allegiance, is highly personal.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The tertiary economy arises with the entrepreneur and capitalism.
 It is based on 'equivalent', i.e.
 'fair' exchange, which is normative.
 Power arises from relative productivity, relative monopoly over a needed
 good, and from the wage relationship which creates dependence.
 Social groups are loose, and wants are determined by advertising and mimetic
 desire.
 Cooperation is no longer correlated to belonging.
 Relationships are impersonal.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The quaternary economy, based on peer to peer processes, is based on 'ideologica
l leaders' which can frame common goals and common belonging and is based
 on membership and contribution.
 Contributing to the best of one's ability to common goals is normative
 and the key question becomes: to follow an existing group or to create
 one's own, i.e.
 to convince or be convinced.
 Contributions to many groups can overlap.
 Power is dependent on the power to convince.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How do these different formats tackle cooperation?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The earliest economic systems were based on the principle of reciprocity,
 which was normative, but within the limits of kin groups such as the family,
 the clan or the tribe.
 The so-called gift economy, operated in a context of abundance (this counter-in
tuitive analysis is well explained by anthropologists such as Marshall Sahlins
 (Sahlins, 1972), who showed that tribal peoples only needed to work a few
 hours per day for their physical survival needs), created a circle of obligatio
ns.
 Cooperation was therefore not free, but an obligation associated to belonging.
 Moreover, the cooperation engendered by reciprocity was balanced by a competiti
on for prestige, that took the form of giving, and very often, of the destructio
n of goods in gift-giving festivals.
 It seems therefore correct to say that the surplus was not re-invested,
 did not create permanent classes, and was not geared on enhancing productivity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
After the breakdown of the tribal gift economies, we can see that premodern
 imperial and feudal forms of human cooperation where based on the use of
 force (the transition from egalitarian Neolithic villages to class-based
 Sumerian cities such as Akkad took place in the 4th millennium B.C.).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Using Edward Haskell’s triune categorization of human cooperation (adversarial,
 neutral, synergetic, Haskell, 1972): It was a win-lose game, which inevitably
 led to the monopolization of power (either in land and military forces
 in precapitalist formations, or in the commercial sphere, as in capitalism).
 Tribute was exacted from losers in a battle (or freely offered by the weak
 seeking protection), labor and produce from slaves and serfs.
 In forced, adversarial cooperation, in this win-loose game, cooperative
 surplus is less than optimal, it is in fact negative: 1 + 1 is less than
 two.
 Productivity and motivation are relatively low.
 Nevertheless, the ability to commandeer and organize vast resources, and
 a further division of labor, increased the productivity of such societies,
 as compared with the tribal economies, and they could sustain a class society
 with a vast army of warriors and spiritual leaders.
 But the competitive game was not geared on increasing the productivity
 of existing resources, but on the control of a bigger scope of resources,
 i.e.
 land and people, through military conquest.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In capitalist society, neutral cooperation is introduced.
 In theory, free workers exchange their labor for a fair salary and producers
 and consumers exchange products for a ‘fair’ amount of money.
 In neutral cooperation, the result of the cooperation is average.
 Participants give just their money’s worth.
 Neither participant in a neutral exchange gets better, 1 plus 1 equals
 2.
 We can interpret this negatively or positively.
 Negatively, capitalist theory is rarely matched in practice, where fair
 exchange is always predicated on monopolization and power relationships,
 not in the form of direct coercion (except in the phase of 'primitive accumulat
ion' of capital, in the 16th and 17th century, where coerced power was still
 very prevalent).
 The situation is therefore much darker, more adversarial and less neutral,
 than the theory would suggest.
 Nevertheless, compared to the earlier feudal models, marked by constant
 warfare, the monopoly of violence exercised by the capitalist state model,
 limits internal armed conflicts, and adversarial relationships are relegated
 to the sphere of commerce, or 'externalized'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The system has proven very productive, and coupled with the distributive
 nature of the welfare state which was imposed on it, has dramatically expanded
 living standards in certain areas of the world.
 Seen in the most positive light, a positive feedback loop may be created
 in which both partners feel they are winning, thus it can sometimes be
 seen as a win-win model.
 But what it cannot do, due to its inherent competitive nature, is transform
 itself into a win-win-win model (or in the formulation of Timothy Wilken
 of synearth.net, a win-win-win-win model, with the biosphere as fourth partner).
 A capitalist relationship cannot freely care for the wider environment,
 only forced to care.
 (This is the rationale for regulation, as self-regulation generally proves
 even more unsatisfactory in terms of the general interest of the wider
 public and the survival of the biosphere)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here peer to peer can be again defined as a clear evolutionary breakthrough.
 It is based on free cooperation.
 Parties to the process all get better from it: In Wilken's formulation:
 1 plus 1 gives a lot more than 2.
 By definition, peer to peer processes are mobilized for common projects
 that are of greater use value to the wider community (since monetized exchange
 value falls away).
 True and authentic P2P therefore logically transforms into a win-win-win
 model, whereby not only the parties gain, but the wider community and social
 field as well.
 It is, in Edward Haskell’s definition, a true synergetic cooperation.
 It is very important to see the ‘energetic’ effects of these different
 forms of cooperation, as I indicated above: 1) forced cooperation yields
 very low quality contributions; 2) the neutral cooperation format of the
 marketplace generates average quality contributions; 3) but freely given
 synergistic cooperation generates passion.
 Participants are automatically drawn to what they do best, at the moments
 at which they are most passionate and energetic about it.
 This is one of the fundamental reasons of the superior quality which is
 eventually, over time, created through open source projects.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Arthur Coulter, author of a book on synergetics (Coulter, 1976), adds a
 further twist explaining the superiority of P2P.
 He adds to the objective definition of Haskell, the subjective definition
 of ‘rapport’ based on the attitudes of the participants.
 Rapport is the state of a persons who are in full agreement, and is determined
 by synergy, empathy, and communication.
 Synergy refers to interactions that promote the goals and efforts of the
 participants; empathy to the mutual understanding of the goals; and communicati
on to the effective interchange of the data.
 His “Principle of Equivalence
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 states that the flow of S + E + C are optimal when they have equivalent
 status to each other.
 If we distinguish Acting Superior, Acting Inferior on one axis and Acting
 Supportively and Acting with Hostility on another axis, then the optimal
 flow arises when one treats the other as ‘somewhat superior’ and with ‘some
 support’.
 Thus an egalitarian-supportive attitude is congenial to the success of
 P2P.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Above we have focused on the means of cooperation, but another important
 aspect is the 'scope' of cooperation, or the amount or 'volume' of what
 can be shared, in both relative and absolute terms.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is how Kim Veltman, a Dutch academic, echoed by evolutionary psychologist
 John Steward puts it:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
“Major advances in civilization typically entail a change in medium, which
 increases greatly the scope of what can be shared.
 Havelock noted that the shift from oral to written culture entailed a dramatic
 increase in the amount of knowledge shared and led to a re-organization
 of knowledge.
 McLuhan and Giesecke explored what happened when Gutenberg introduced print
 culture in Europe.
 The development of printing went hand in hand with the rise of early modern
 science.
 In the sixteenth century, the rise of vernacular printing helped spread
 new knowledge.
 From the mid-seventeenth century onwards this again increased as learned
 correspondence became the basis for a new category of learned journals
 (Journal des savants, Journal of the Royal Society, Göttinger Gelehrten
 Anzeiger etc.), whence expressions such as the "world of letters.
 The advent of Internet marks a radical increase in this trend towards sharing.
 “(http://erste.oekonux-konferenz.de/dokumentation/texte/veltman.html)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In a similar vein, a French philosopher, Jean-Louis Sagot-Duvauroux (Sagot-Duvau
roux, 1995), who wrote the book, “Pour la Gratuite
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, stresses that many spheres of life are not dominated by state or capital,
 that these are all based on free and equal exchange, and that the extension
 of these spheres is synonymous with civilization-building .
 The very fact that the cooperation takes place in the sphere of free and
 non-monetary exchange of the Information Commons, is a sign of civilisational
 advance.
 By contrast, the 'monetarisation of everything' (commodification) that
 is a hallmark of cognitive capitalism, is a sign of de-civilization .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Recent developments concerning the participatory culture on the internet
 have stimulated the discipline of cooperation studies, which study how
 to promote human cooperation.
 For example, they are trying to determine the maximum number to obtain
 efficient non-hierarchically cooperating groups, beyond which centralization
 and hierarchy sets in.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
3.3.B.
 The Evolution of Collective Intelligence
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Related to the above evolution of cooperation is the concept of collective
 intelligence, which concerns any knowledge of the collective, which goes
 beyond or transcends the knowledge of its parts .
 Collective Intelligence is the process whereby groups take charge of their
 challenges and future evolution, by using the resources of all its members
 in such a way that a new level emerges which has added qualities.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Jean-Francois Noubel in an online book-in-progress at http://www.thetransitioner.o
rg/ic outlines three stages, arguing that we are in a transition to a fourth.
 The following is a synthesis of his work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first stage is the 'original collective intelligence', which can only
 exist in small groups, and historically has been typified by the human
 organization in the tribal era.
 Seven characteristics define this stage:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
an emerging whole that goes beyond its parts 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
the existence of a 'holoptic' space , which allows the participants to access
 both horizontal knowledge, of what others are doing, and access to vertical
 knowledge, i.e.
 about the emerging totality; to have collective intelligence, all participants
 must have this access, from their particular angle 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
a social contract with explicit and implicit social rules about the forms
 of exchange, common purpose, etc..
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
a polymorph architecture which allows for ever-changing configurations 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
a shared 'linked object', which needs to be clear.
 This can be an object of attraction (the ball in sports), of repulsion
 (a common enemy), of a created object (future goal, artistic expression).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
the existence of a learning organization, where both individuals and the
 collective can learn from the experience of the parts 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
a gift economy, in the sense that there is dynamic of giving in exchange
 for participating in the benefits of the commons 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This original stage had two limits: the number of participants, and, the
 need for spatial proximity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The second stage is the stage of pyramidal intelligence.
 As soon as a certain level of complexity is reached, it will transcend
 the limits in numbers as well as the spatial limits.
 Cooperation takes on hierarchical formats, with the following characteristics:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
division of labor, in which the constituent parts become interchangeable;
 based on specialized access to information and panoptism, i.e.
 only a few have centralized access to the totality 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
authority organizes a asymmetrical information transfer, based on command
 and control 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
regulated access to scarce resources, usually through a monetary system
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
the existence of norms and standards, often privatized, that allow knowledge
 to be objectified 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pyramidal intelligence exists to obtain 'economies of scale' through repetitive
 processes that can add value to an undifferentiated mass of raw material.
 To see what kind of intelligence predominates in an organization, adds
 Noubel, look at how it produces.
 If it produces mass products, then, despite eventual token usage of peer
 to peer processes, it will essentially be based an hierarchy-based pyramidal
 intelligence.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The third form of collective intelligence is swarming.
 It exists where 'simple individuals' cooperate in a global project without
 holoptism, i.e.
 collective intelligence emerges from their simple interactions.
 The individual agents are not aware of the whole.
 This is the mode of organization of social insects , and of market-based
 societies .
 The problem is that in the insect world, individuals are expendable for
 the good of the system, while this is unacceptable in the human world because
 it negates the full richness of persons.
 This means that the contemporary enthusiasm for swarm intelligence has
 to be looked at with caution.
 It is not a peer to peer process, because its lacks the quality of holoptism,
 the ability of any part to know the whole.
 Instead, swarming is characterized by 'stigmergy', i.e.
 'environmental mechanisms used to coordinate activities of independent
 actors' .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Thus, a fourth level of collective intelligence is emerging, which Noubel
 calls 'global collective intelligence'.
 Compared to original CI is has the following added characteristics:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
a 'sufficient' money as opposed to a scarce money (see The Transitioner.org/ic
 site for more details) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
open standards that maximize interoperability 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
an information system to regulate symbolic exchange 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
a permanent connection with cyberspace 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
personal development to acquire the capabilities for such cooperation 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this new global collective intelligence, the original limits in numbers
 and spatial proximity are transcended by creating linkages through cyberspace.
 In this context, we can see why technological developments are an integral
 part of this evolution, as it enables this form of networking.
 What cyberspace does it to create the possibility of groups cooperating
 despite physical distance, and to coordinate these groups in a network
 .
 An important aspect of the new cyberspace-enabled collective intelligence
 will be the increasingly symbiotic relationship between the countless human
 minds (one billion at present) and the huge networked intelligent machine
 we are creating .
 This noospheric networked intelligence is not an alien construction imposed
 on us, but something we are collectively creating through our sharing and
 participation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
David Weinberger has recently summarized the history of knowledge exchange
 for the Release 1.0.
 newsletter, showing how digitalization has freed categorization from the
 shackles it had in the physical world .
 He notes how humanity first started to separate things (shoes in shoe boxes,
 etc..), then, we the advent of the alphabet, it started to separate the informati
on about things, from the things itself, putting the books in library shelves,
 and the data in card catalogs.
 The information would inevitably be classified in a hierarchy of knowledge,
 a tree structure.
 One way to know the world, one way to access knowledge.
 In the 1930's, an Indian librarian named Shiyalin Ranganathan, 'decentralized'
 knowledge categorization.
 An object has different facets, and the user can determine which facet
 is the most important for him/her.
 Thus, the catalog will organize the information hierarchically, but flexible,
 starting with one facet, then another, following the specifications of
 the user, as long as the programmer has prefigured these choices.
 On the web is now emerging a bottom-up approach, which does not necessitate
 any prior hierarchical categorization.
 Users will add tags , and different users or user groups will use different
 groups of tags, each reflecting their personal or group ontologies, thereby
 illuminating different aspects of the object.
 This peer to peer categorization methods are called folksonomies .
 In the sphere of abundance that is the Internet, it is near impossible
 to continue using hierarchical and well-designed metadata systems, due
 to the sheer volume of data and the large numbers of users who would have
 to be disciplined, so bottom-up tagging makes a lot of sense .
 In the peer to peer era, knowledge is liberated from preconceived and forced
 categorizations.
 Many authors have examined how our categories of classification are also
 instruments of power, and noted how different social formations overturned
 previous forms of categorizing the world .
 With the P2P classification schemes we see for the first time a recognition
 of multiperspectival worldviews.
 Knowledge is a distributed network, following a peer to peer logic.
 Notice how computers themselves have followed a logic from linear calculation
 to parallel and distributed computing, and from the mainframe/dumb terminal
 (centralization), via the client server (decentralization) model, to the
 internet filesharing ('the network is the computer') model.
 In computer programming the shift has been from linear ad procedural software
 production methods, to object-oriented programming, conceived as autonomous
 objects.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What is certain is that the emergence of networked media involves a new
 epistemology, a new way of relating to the truth.
 In one of the articles in a collection on ‘Subjectivation du Net’ in the
 journal Multitudes, issue 21, Jean-Louis Weisberg problematises the new
 epistemology.
 The explodion in the number of interconnected humans and machines, who
 are individually and collectively posting information and sharing knowledge
 , and linking multiple media formats through hyperlinks and RSS feeds,
 prefigures entirely new ways of knowing and learning.
 It is linked to the growing distrust of the older forms of mass media and
 even representational democracy, that we are witnessing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The objective dimension of truth, implied in mass media, where specialized
 reporters verify facts to establish one narrative of truth, is making place
 for a truth that is emerging out of continuous intersubjective confrontation.
 Networks users, experiment, modelise and communally discuss events, acquiring
 the possibility of a much greater intimacy with the discussed event or
 process, a view of reality which is enriched by the multiple interpretations.
 But what is needed is a common meta-framework, so that the space is opened
 up for families of interpretations to compete.
 Another important related shift that is occurring relates to how we are
 learning and visions about the learning process.
 Behaviorism, cognitivism and constructivism, the 3 main learning theories,
 locate learning <within the person>, even as the latter admits that learning
 is socially constructed.
 Emerging connectivist learning theory on the other hand, acknowledges that
 learning can take place 'outside' the individual, through his connections.
 Since reality is ever shifting and changing, the individual ambition to
 know everything is a lost cause, paucity of knowledge has been replaced
 by an abundance of knowledge.
 Crucial skills are know the ability to know 'where', in our field of connection
s, the actionable knowledge is located, to be able to evaluate 'what' has
 to be learned in a context of abundance, and to negotiate and integrate
 a variety of opinions on any given subject.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finally, theories about how individuals learn, still the focus of connectivist
 theory, must be coupled with a study of the new peer to peer knowledge
 dynamics, especially of the communal validation of truth which occurs within
 peer groups, and which replaces institutional mediation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
3.3.C.
 Beyond Formalization, Institutionalization, Commodification
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Observation of commons-based peer production and knowledge exchange, unveils
 a further number of important elements, which can be added to our earlier
 definition and has to be added to the characteristic of holoptism just
 discussed in 3.4.B.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In premodern societies, knowledge is ‘guarded’, it is part of what constitutes
 power.
 Guilds are based on secrets, the Church does not translate the Bible, and
 it guards its monopoly of interpretation.
 Knowledge is obtained through imitation and initiation in closed circles.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With the advent of modernity, and let’s think about Diderot’s project of
 the Encyclopedia as an example, knowledge is from now on regarded as a
 public resource which should flow freely.
 But at the same time, modernity, as described by Foucault in particular,
 starts a process of regulating the flow of knowledge through a series of
 formal rules, which aim to distinguish valid knowledge from invalid one.
 The academic peer review method, the setting up of universities which regulate
 discourse, the birth of professional bodies as guardians of expertise,
 the scientific method, are but a few of such regulations.
 An intellectual property rights regime also regulates the legitimate use
 one can make of such knowledge, and which is responsible for a re-privatization
 of knowledge.
 If original copyright served to stimulate creation by balancing the rights
 of authors and the public, the recent strengthening of intellectual property
 rights can be more properly understood as an attempt at ‘enclosure’ of
 the information commons, which has to serve to create monopolies based
 on rent obtained through licenses.
 Thus at the end of modernity, in a similar process to what we described
 in the field of work culture, there is an exacerbation of the most negative
 aspects of the privatization of knowledge: IP legislation is incredibly
 tightened, information sharing becomes punishable, the market invades the
 public sphere of universities and academic peer review and the scientific
 commons are being severely damaged.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Again, peer to peer appears as a radical shift.
 In the new emergent practices of knowledge exchange, equipotency is assumed
 from the start.
 There are no formal rules to prohibit anyone from participation, a characterist
ic that could be called 'anti-credentialism' .
 (unlike academic peer review, where formal degrees are required ).
 Validation is a communal intersubjective process.
 It often takes place through a process akin to swarming, whereby large
 number of participants will tug at the mistakes in a piece of software
 or text, the so-called 'piranha effect', and so perfect it better than
 an individual genius could.
 Many examples of this kind are described in the book 'The Wisdom of Crowds',
 by James Surowiecki.
 Though there are constraints in this process, depending on the type of
 governance chosen by various P2P projects, what stands out compared to
 previous modes of production is the self-selection aspect.
 Production is granular and modular, and only the individuals themselves
 know exactly if their exact mix of expertise fits the problem at hand.
 We have autonomous selection instead of heteronomous selection.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If there are formal rules, they have to be accepted by the community, and
 they are ad hoc for particular projects.
 In the Slashdot online publishing system which serves the open source community
, a large group of editors combs through the postings, and there’s a complex
 system of ratings of the editors themselves; in other systems every article
 is rated creating a hierarchy of interest which pushes the lesser-rated
 articles down the list.
 As we explained above, in the context of knowledge classification, there
 is a move away from institutional categorization using hierarchical trees
 of knowledge, such as the bibliographic formats (Dewey, UDC, etc..), to informal
 communal ‘tagging’, what some people have termed folksonomies.
 In blogging, news and commentary are democratized and open to any participant,
 and it is the reputation of trustworthiness, acquired over time, by the
 individual in question, which will lead to the viral diffusion of particular
 ‘memes’.
 Power and influence are determined by the quality of the contribution,
 and have to be accepted and constantly renewed by the community of participants.
 All this can be termed the de-formalization of knowledge.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A second important aspect is de-institutionalization.
 In premodernity, knowledge is transmitted through tradition, through initiation
 by experienced masters to those who are validated to participate in the
 chain mostly through birth.
 In modernity, as we said, validation and the legitimation of knowledge
 is processed through institutions.
 It is assumed that the autonomous individual needs socialization, ‘disciplining
’, through such institutions.
 Knowledge has to be mediated.
 Thus, whether a news item is trustworthy is determined largely by its source,
 say the Wall Street Journal, or the Encyclopedia Brittanica, who are supposed
 to have formal methodologies and expertise.
 P2P processes are de-institutionalized, in the sense that it is the collective
 itself which validates the knowledge.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Please note my semantic difficulty here.
 Indeed, it can be argued that P2P is just another form of institution,
 another institutional framework, in the sense of a self-perpetuating organizati
onal format.
 And that would be correct: P2P processes are not structureless, but most
 often flexible structures that follow internally generated rules.
 In previous social forms, institutions got detached from the functions
 and objectives they had to play, became 'autonomous'.
 In turn because of the class structure of society, and the need to maintain
 domination, and because of 'bureaucratization' and self-interest of the
 institutional leaderships, those institutions turn 'against society' and
 even against their own functions and objectives.
 Such institutions become a factor of alienation.
 It is this type of institutionalization that is potentially overcome by
 P2P processes.
 The mediating layer between participation and the result of that participation,
 is much thinner, dependent on protocol rather controlled by hierarchy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A good example of P2P principles at work can be found in the complex of
 solutions instituted by the University of Openness.
 UO is a set of free-form ‘universities’, where anyone who wants to learn
 or to share his expertise can form teams with the explicit purpose of collectiv
e learning.
 There are no entry exams and no final exams.
 The constitution of teams is not determined by any prior disciplinary categoriz
ation.
 The library of UO is distributed, i.e.
 all participating individuals can contribute their own books to a collective
 distributed library .
 The categorization of the books is explicitly ‘anti-systemic’, i.e.
 any individual can build his own personal ontologies of information, and
 semantic web principles are set to work to uncover similarities between
 the various categorizations .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All this prefigures a profound shift in our epistemologies.
 In modernity, with the subject-object dichotomy, the autonomous individual
 is supposed to gaze objectively at the external world, and to use formalized
 methodologies, which will be intersubjectively verified through academic
 peer review.
 Post-modernity has caused strong doubts about this scenario.
 The individual is no longer considered autonomous, but always-already part
 of various fields, of power, of psychic forces, of social relations, molded
 by ideologies, etc..
 Rather than in need of socialization, the presumption of modernity, he
 is seen to be in need of individuation.
 But he is no longer an ‘indivisible atom’, but rather a singularity, a
 unique and ever-evolving composite.
 His gaze cannot be truly objective, but is always partial, as part of a
 system can never comprehend the system as a whole.
 The individual has a single set of perspectives on things reflecting his
 own history and limitations.
 Truth can therefore only be apprehended collectively by combining a multiplicit
y of other perspectives, from other singularities, other unique points of
 integration, which are put in ‘common’.
 It is this profound change in epistemologies which P2P-based knowledge
 exchange reflects.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A third important aspect of P2P is the process of de-commodification.
 In traditional societies, commodification, and ‘market pricing’ was only
 a relative phenomenon.
 Economic exchange depended on a set of mutual obligations, and even were
 monetary equivalents were used, the price rarely reflected an open market.
 It is only with industrial capitalism that the core of the economic exchanges
 started to be determined by market pricing, and both products and labor
 became commodities.
 But still, there was a public culture and education system, and immaterial
 exchanges largely fell outside this system.
 With cognitive capitalism, the owners of information assets are no longer
 content to live any immaterial process outside the purview of commodification
 and market pricing, and there is a strong drive to ‘privatize everything’,
 education included, our love lives included Any immaterial process can
 be resold as commodities.
 Thus again, in the recent era the characteristics of capitalism are exacerbated
, with P2P representing the counter-reaction.
 With ‘commons-based peer production’ or P2P-based knowledge exchange more
 generally, the production does not result in commodities sold to consumers,
 but in use value made for users.
 Because of the GPL license, no copyrighted monopoly can arise.
 GPL products can eventually be sold, but such sale is usually only a credible
 alternative (since it can most often be downloaded for free), if it is
 associated with a service model.
 It is in fact mostly around such services that commercial open source companies
 found their model (example: Red Hat).
 Since the producers of commons-based products are rarely paid, their main
 motivation is not the exchange value for the eventually resulting commodity,
 but the increase in use value, their own learning and reputation.
 Motivation can be polyvalent, but will generally be anything but monetary.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the reasons of the emergence of the commodity-based economy, capitalism,
 is that a market is an efficient means to distribute ‘information’ about
 supply and demand, with the concrete price determining value as a synthesis
 of these various pressures.
 In the P2P environment we see the invention of alternative ways of determining
 value, through software algorhythms.
 In search engines, value is determined by algorhythms that determine pointers
 to documents, the more pointers, and the more value these pointers themselves
 have, the higher the value accorded to a document.
 This can be done either in a general matter, or for specialized interests,
 by looking at the rankings within the specific community, or even on a
 individual level, through collaborative filtering, by looking at what similar
 individuals have rated and used well.
 So in a similar but alternative way to the reputation-based schemes, we
 have a set of solutions to go beyond pricing, and beyond monetarisation,
 to determine value.
 The value that is determined in this case is of course an indication of
 potential use value, rather than ‘exchange value’ for the market.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The peer to format, as a new organizational model, has been the subject
 of some study.
 Below we add a graph outlining the difference between P2P, called 'Edge
 Organizations' in this context, and Hierarchical Organizations.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
3.3.D.
 The Evolution of Temporality: towards an Integral Time
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Commons-based peer production and the associated work culture, the hacker
 ethic, also represent a milestone in the history of temporality.
 A quick reminder of the history of temporal experience according to our
 premodern-modern-postmodern scheme will show this.
 Tribal people and early agricultural civilizations lived in a cyclic time,
 following the rhythm of nature and of associated religious rituals.
 In many aspects it was an experience of an eternal now.
 Ancestors and mythical creators of the civilizations were deemed not to
 live in a distant and remote past, but in the same temporality.
 Agricultural civilizations started developing conceptions of long-term
 cycles, and they often came into cycles of progressive degeneration (as
 in the Hindu time scheme ending with the Kali Yuga, the end time of the
 Iron Age) that would then bring on a new cycle of cycles: the myth of eternal
 return.
 This would change with the advent of the monotheistic religions which in
 some sense prefigured modernity.
 Temporality became progressive, going from past to future, seen as an apocalypt
ic liberation.
 Modernity started viewing time in a calculating fashion, in discrete blocks
 which could be measured and managed, and the Judeo-Christian temporal line
 was transformed into the ideology of Progress.
 Time was essentially being made abstract, quantified and stripped of quality,
 spatialized.
 But with modernity came stress: human time became enslaved to the time
 of capitalist efficiency, to the time of the machines, to the cycles of
 commerce.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These trends find their apotheosis in our current postmodern times, where
 competition has become a matter of speed, where the economy becomes a 24/7
 affair.
 We have described this state of hypercompetition, coupled with time-space
 condensation, and the extension of efficiency thinking to the private sphere,
 in our section on the hacker ethic, showing also its psychological unsustainabi
lity.
 Many of our contemporaries are now time-sick, imprisoned by very short
 term thinking, their time horizon collapsing.
 Another element associated with current time experience is the emergence
 of a collective world-time, collapsing into a single mass-lived experience
 through the role of the mass media.
 Paradigmatic was the first Gulf War incident, where millions of people
 where watching a missile go down on a Baghdad target.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We have often argued how current trends both exacerbate certain aspects
 of modernity, while at the same time counter-trends point to alternatives
 going beyond it.
 The same thing might be said about peer to peer temporality.
 If postmodernity brought us the supreme alienation of a permanent now collapsin
g other temporal necessities and experiences, infiltrating even our private
 time of intimacy, exhibiting a temporal imperialism, then peer to peer
 temporality shows the promise of an 'integral time'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We argued that CBPP projects offered a number of advantages such as the
 self-management of time.
 Classic industrial production described jobs in great detail, calculating
 every move (Taylorism) and controlled the debit of each worker (volume
 of production in the shortest possible time).
 In postmodernity, the focus is on the objectives and results, and on the
 deadlines in which they have to be achieved.
 For many workers today, their life is one of competing deadlines, and the
 hundreds of interruptions that stand in the way.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Cooperative CBPP projects traditionally reject such rigid schemes.
 While work on such projects can be fairly intense, and can be very 'fast'
 as well, this intensity emerges from the natural life rhythms of the collaborat
ors.
 It is not imposed from the outside.
 It is rather the different subgroups which start to condition each other,
 the time spans are generated internally, more organically following the
 self-unfolding patters of the creative work.
 The human is no longer enslaved to time.
 There is in fact no clear connection between time spent on a project and
 its inherent quality , as many in the artistic world have experienced,
 and t his model is now expanding in other productive fields, as generic
 knowledge work is creative as well.
 Whereas in modernity, say the Fordist/Taylorist paradigm, the focus is
 on 'quantity', and in postmodernity the focus is still on embedding qualitative
 concerns into the straightjacket of high-pressure objectives and deadlines,
 in peer to peer, the focus is more exclusively on quality.
 'Work' is about transforming something into a desired use value, and the
 success is measured in how well the use value has been created.
 The process follows a individual and collective self-unfolding in which
 the various subprojects condition each other, gradually coalescing into
 both a desired but also unforeseen outcome.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This shift in temporal experience also has political consequences, outlined
 by John Holloway in his Revolution without Power.
 Typical for modernity was that transformed Judeo-Christian underpinnings
 of socialist ideology had fused with the apocalyptic and utopian time sense,
 gave rise to the counter-time of the revolution, for the wait for a radical
 transformation or for the next reform.
 It was either the reformist time who did not change the 'system as such',
 or the revolutionary time which did everything for the system's destruction.
 In both cases there was no integration between the present now and the
 desired future.
 Integral time points to another solution.
 Living in the now, in the refusal of contributing to the self-destruction
 of our civilization, can be combined by building the alternative as a continuin
g process .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is a whole new temporal experience.
 We call it 'integral time' because it represents a autonomous mastery of
 time, where the different temporal experiences (cyclical, linear, etc…)
 become transparent and used 'at the right time'.
 The time for intimacy, the time for rest and relaxation, the time for intellect
ual and spiritual renewal, all have their different rhythms, which can be
 acknowledged in CBPP projects, in a way that they cannot in the hypercompetitiv
e for-profit world.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
3.4 Placing P2P in an intersubjective typology
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
3.4.A.
 P2P, The Gift Economy and Communal Shareholding
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In my opinion, there is a profound misconception regarding peer to peer,
 expressed by the various authors who call it a gift economy, such as Richard
 Barbrook (Barbrook, 1995), or Steven Weber (Weber, 2004).
 But, as Stephan Merten of Oekonux.de has already argued, P2P production
 methods are not a gift economy based on equal sharing, but a form of communal
 shareholding based on participation.
 In a gift economy if you give something, the receiving party has to return
 if not the gift, then something of at least comparable value (in fact the
 original tribal gift economy was more about creating relationships and
 obligations and a means to evacuate excess, since they did not need it
 for their basic survival needs ).
 In a participative system such as communal shareholding, organized around
 a common resource, anyone can use or contribute according to his need and
 inclinations.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let me give a context to this claim by introducing the typology of intersubjecti
ve relations, as defined by anthropologist Alan Page Fiske (Fiske, 1993).
 There are he says, historically and across all cultures, only four basic
 types of relating to one another, which form a grammar of human relationships,
 these are Authority Ranking, Equality Matching, Market Pricing, and Communal
 Shareholding.
 From the following description, one can deduce that P2P does not correspond
 to Equality Matching, which is the principle behind a gift economy, but
 to Communal Shareholding.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
“People use just four fundamental models for organizing most aspects of
 sociality most of the time in all cultures .
 These models are Communal Sharing, Authority Ranking, Equality Matching,
 and Market Pricing.
 Communal Sharing (CS) is a relationship in which people treat some dyad
 or group as equivalent and undifferentiated with respect to the social
 domain in question.
 Examples are people using a commons (CS with respect to utilization of
 the particular resource), people intensely in love (CS with respect to
 their social selves), people who "ask not for whom the bell tolls, for
 it tolls for thee" (CS with respect to shared suffering and common well-being),
 or people who kill any member of an enemy group indiscriminately in retaliation
 for an attack (CS with respect to collective responsibility).
 In Authority Ranking (AR) people have asymmetric positions in a linear
 hierarchy in which subordinates defer, respect, and (perhaps) obey, while
 superiors take precedence and take pastoral responsibility for subordinates.
 Examples are military hierarchies (AR in decisions, control, and many other
 matters), ancestor worship (AR in offerings of filial piety and expectations
 of protection and enforcement of norms), monotheistic religious moralities
 (AR for the definition of right and wrong by commandments or will of God),
 social status systems such as class or ethnic rankings (AR with respect
 to social value of identities), and rankings such as sports team standings
 (AR with respect to prestige).
 AR relationships are based on perceptions of legitimate asymmetries, not
 coercive power; they are not inherently exploitative (although they may
 involve power or cause harm).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In Equality Matching relationships people keep track of the balance or differenc
e among participants and know what would be required to restore balance.
 Common manifestations are turn-taking, one-person one-vote elections, equal
 share distributions, and vengeance based on an-eye-for-an-eye, a-tooth-for-a-to
oth.
 Examples include sports and games (EM with respect to the rules, procedures,
 equipment and terrain), baby-sitting coops (EM with respect to the exchange
 of child care), and restitution in-kind (EM with respect to righting a
 wrong).
 Market Pricing relationships are oriented to socially meaningful ratios
 or rates such as prices, wages, interest, rents, tithes, or cost-benefit
 analyses.
 Money need not be the medium, and MP relationships need not be selfish,
 competitive, maximizing, or materialistic—any of the four models may exhibit
 any of these features.
 MP relationships are not necessarily individualistic; a family may be the
 CS or AR unit running a business that operates in an MP mode with respect
 to other enterprises.
 Examples are property that can be bought, sold, or treated as investment
 capital (land or objects as MP), marriages organized contractually or implicitl
y in terms of costs and benefits to the partners, prostitution (sex as MP),
 bureaucratic cost-effectiveness standards (resource allocation as MP),
 utilitarian judgments about the greatest good for the greatest number,
 or standards of equity in judging entitlements in proportion to contributions
 (two forms of morality as MP), considerations of "spending time" efficiently,
 and estimates of expected kill ratios (aggression as MP).
 “ (source: Fiske website)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
From the above description, it should be clear that the tribal gift economy
 is a form of sharing, based on ‘equal’ parts, according to a specific criteria
 of ‘what it is that functions as common standard for comparison’.
 Thus in the tribal economy, when a clan or tribe (or the members of such)
 gives away its surplus, the recipient group or individual is forced to
 eventually give back, say the next year, at least as much, or they will
 loose relative prestige.
 What such a gift economy does however is create a community of obligations
 and reciprocity, unlike the market-based mechanisms, where 'equal is traded
 with equal', and every transaction stands alone.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Similarly, in the feudal social redistribution mechanism, the rich and powerful
 compete in the gift giving to Church or Sangha, as a matter of prestige.
 In this case, what they receive back is not other material gifts, but,
 on the one hand social prestige, and on the other hand, the immaterial
 benefits of 'better karma' ('merit' in S.E.
 Asian Buddhism), or being closer to salvation (in the form of indulgences
 in medieval Christianity).
 In the gift economy, "something" is always being exchanged
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is not the mechanism that operates in the sphere of knowledge exchange
 on the internet.
 In open source production, filesharing, or knowledge exchange communities,
 I freely contribute, what I can, what I want, without obligation; on the
 recipient side, one simply takes what one needs.
 It is common for any web-based project to have let’s say 10% active contributin
g members, and 90% passive lurkers.
 This can be an annoyance, but is never a ‘fundamental problem’, for the
 very reason that P2P operates in a sphere of abundance, where a tragedy
 of the commons, an abuse of common property, cannot occur, or at least,
 not in the classical sense.
 In the concept of Tragedy of the Commons , communal holdings are depleted
 and abused, because they belong to no one and also because physical goods
 are limited 'rival' goods, they can be taken away.
 The conflict is between the collective interest for preserving the Commons,
 and the individual incentive to abuse it for one's own personal benefit.
 We should note how this theory is based on a 'unregulated' Commons, leaving
 it without defense against individual predation, and it is therefore misleading
 as a general theory of the Commons.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But in the Information Commons created through P2P processes, the value
 of the collective knowledge base is not diminished by use, but on the contrary
 enhanced by it: it is governed, in John Frow's words, by a Comedy of the
 Commons, or using a similar metaphor, producing a Cornucopia of the Commons.
 This is so because of the network effect, which makes resources more valuable
 the more they are used.
 Think about the example of the fax, which was relatively useless until
 a critical mass of users was reached.
 And the goods are immaterial, and thus 'non-rival', which means that they
 can be replicated or replenished without cost , they cannot be monopolized
 (unless by law and licenses, hence the intellectual property wars).
 It is when these 'network externalities' are at play, that the Commons
 form seems to be the most appropriate, functioning better than with individual
 private property.
 From the point of view of the individual users themselves, who act in their
 own interest, what P2P systems do is to mobilize what the economists call
 ‘positive externalities’ .
 These are benefits generated by user resources or behaviour, which are
 lost if they are not used by others or a collective, but do not generate
 negative side effect for the user either.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What the better P2P systems do is to make such participation, such sharing
 of positive externalities, ‘automatic’, so that even passive use becomes
 useful participation for the system as a whole.
 Think of how BitTorrent makes any user who downloads a resource, in his/her
 turn a resource for others to use, unbeknownst and independent of any conscious
 action of the user .
 Say I have a team working on a software project, and it creates a special
 email system to communicate around development issues.
 This communication is considered a common resource and archived, and thus,
 without any conscious effort of the participating members, automatically
 augments the common resource base.
 One of the key elements in the success of P2P projects, and the key to
 overcoming any ‘free rider’ problem, is therefore to develop technologies
 of “Participation Capture" (see the endnote on how my concept differs from
 both panoptical surveillance and 'sousveillance' ).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are of course new social problems arising with P2P, some of which
 we do not know yet, and some, already occurring, which are related to the
 quality of social behavior, but interestingly, these problems are tackled
 through the collective as well.
 For example, Clay Shirky, one of the most astute observers of the new social
 networking sphere, has observed how 'flaming', which can be a serious problem
 in mailing lists, has been seriously attenuated by blogs and wiki's, through
 a focus on 'social design' .
 Shirky shows how the design, the protocols in Galloway's view, have to
 move away from a focus on the personal user facing a box, towards a recognition
 of the social usage of these technologies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The social logic of information and resource sharing is a cultural reversal
 vis a vis the information retention logic of hierarchical social systems.
 Participation is assumed, and non-participation has to be justified.
 Information sharing, the public good status of your information, is assumed,
 and it is secrecy which has to be justified.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So what people are doing in P2P systems, is participating, and doing so
 they are creating a ‘commons’.
 Unlike traditional Communal Shareholding, which starts from already existing
 physical resources, in peer to peer, the knowledge commons is created through
 participation, and does not exist ‘ex ante’.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All of the above argumentation leads to the conclusion that P2P is not a
 Equality Matching model (and not a Market Pricing Model), but Communal
 Shareholding.
 These arguments have an ideological subtext.
 The reason I am stressing this analysis is to counter neoliberal dogma
 that humans are only motivated by greed.
 Saying that P2P is a gift economy requires a strict accounting of the exchange.
 Or saying that such participation is motivated by the quest for reputation
 only, or that it is a game to obtain attention, corresponds to this same
 ideology which cannot accept that humans also have a ‘cooperative’ nature,
 and that it can thrive in the right conditions.
 Our aim is not to deny that humans have these characteristics, but only
 to point out that cooperation and altruism are just as constitutive of
 who we are, and given the right institutional conditions and moral development,
 the latter rather than the former can be enhanced.
 There is no need to 'reduce' the characteristics in a one-sided manner,
 but rather to recognize the subtle richness and combinations of who we
 are, and to develop the right kind of institutions and knowledge (such
 as the new field of cooperation studies) to strengthen the latter's potentialit
ies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Though the early traditional gift economy was spiritually motivated and
 experienced as a set of obligations, which created reciprocity and relationship
s, involving honor and allegiance (as explained by Marcel Mauss in the Gift),
 since gifts were nevertheless made in a context of obligatory return, it
 involved a kind of thinking that is quite different from the gratuity that
 is characteristic of P2P: giving to a P2P project is explicitly not done
 for an 'certain' and individual return of the gift, but for the use value,
 for the learning involved, for reputational benefits perhaps, but only
 indirectly.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The above does not mean that P2P is unrelated to the contemporary revival
 of gift economy applications.
 Local Exchange Trading Systems, which are springing up in many places,
 are forms of Equality Matching, and, from an 'egalitarian' point of view,
 they may be preferable to Market Pricing mechanisms, since for them, any
 hour of labor has an equal value.
 Both P2P as ‘Communal Shareholding’, and contemporary expressions of the
 gift economy ethos, are part of the same ‘spirit’ of ‘gifting’, or of free
 cooperation.
 Substantial numbers of participants to P2P projects freely give, as do
 participants in LETS systems and other schemes.
 The difference is in the expectation that they will receive something specific
 and of equal value in return.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But what P2P technologies do is that they enable the creation of information-ric
h exchanges with dramatically lower transactional costs, thereby enabling
 gift economy applications, what Yochai Benkler calls a 'sharing economy',
 as well as numerous P2P-based market exchanges, which were not economical
 before.
 P2P is therefore conducive to a support of the growth of a gift economy
 based on its technology, while gifting and sharing practices are strengthened
 by the P2P ethos as well.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
3.4.B.
 P2P and the Market
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Quite a few American authors, especially libertarians such as Eric Raymond,
 but also ‘common-ists’ such as Lawrence Lessig (Lessig,2004), through his
 arguments for a Creative Commons, says in effect that P2P processes are
 market-based.
 Is this a correct assumption.
 Perhaps a useful distinction is the one made by Fernand Braudel in the
 'Wheels of Commerce' (Braudel, 1992), where he distinguishes the ordinary
 economic life of exchanges at the local level, the fairly transparent market
 of towns and cities, and monopolistic capitalism.
 It is only the latter which has a 'growth' imperative .
 Growth is a feature of capitalism, not of markets per se.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
P2P exchange can be considered in market terms only in the sense that free
 individuals are free to contribute, or take what they need, following their
 individual inclinations, with a invisible hand bringing it all together,
 without monetary mechanism.
 Thus, it is a market only in the sense of the first and perhaps second
 level of distinction in the Braudel interpretation, not the third.
 What Braudel notes is that small markets function as 'meshworks', i.e.
 distributed networks, but that capitalism was always-already based on large
 hierarchical companies rigging the market (large relative to their markets,
 as was already the case in 14th century Venice).
 Market vendors are price takers, following supply and demand; but capital
 functions as a price setter, controlling the market and keeping out competitors.
 Thus the latter -- and in the contemporary era of financially-dominated
 capitalism these aspects have been exacerbated to an unprecedented degree
 – can better be called 'anti-markets', as has been suggested by Manuel
 DeLanda.
 A market can be a necessary condition for P2P processes to occur, but the
 anti-markets created by capitalism are anti-thetical to it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Though an increasing number of programmers get paid for commons-based peer
 production, it is not in general their main motivation.
 P2P products are rarely made for the profit obtained from the exchange
 value, but more often and more fundamentally for their use value and acceptance
 by a user community.
 So what Lessig means by with his notion of a market-based solution is simply
 to say that producers are free to contribute or not, that users are free
 to use them or not.
 All this means that it is hard to pin down P2P within the old categories
 of left and right ideologies, it is a hybrid form with market-based and
 commons-based aspects.
 Since we have shown how P2P is in fact inextricably bound with the idea
 of a Commons and the intersubjective typology of communal shareholding,
 the equation of P2P with a market is mostly misleading.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Indeed, note how P2P differs in important aspects from a market, even genuine
 ones in the typology of Braudel, (Market Pricing in the typology of Fiske):
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Markets do not function according to the criteria of collective intelligence
 and holoptism, but rather, in the form of insect-like swarming intelligence.
 Yes, there are autonomous agents in a distributed environment, but each
 individual only sees his own immediate benefit .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Markets are based on 'neutral' cooperation, and not on synergistic cooperation:
 no reciprocity is created.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Markets operate for the exchange value and profit, not directly for the
 use value.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Whereas P2P aims at full participation, markets only fulfill the needs of
 those with purchasing power.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Amongst the disadvantages of markets are:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
They do not function well for common needs that do not assure full payment
 of the service rendered (national defense, general policing, education
 and public health), and do not only fail to take into account negative
 externalities (the environment, social costs, future generations), but
 actively discourages such behavior.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Since open markets tend to lower profit and wages, it always gives rise
 to anti-markets, where oligopolies and monopolies use their privileged
 position to have the state 'rig' the market to their benefit.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Though market forces (in fact 'antimarket') increasingly adopt P2P-like
 functioning, as we have demonstrated in chapter 1 (technological base)
 and chapter 2 (economic usage), and as it own organizational format (as
 demonstrated in Empire by Negri and Hardt), in this case the distributed
 meshwork will always be subordinated to hierarchy or market pricing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
P2P in contrast, has a teleology of participation, leading to the opposite
 characteristic: if centralization or hierarchy or authority models are
 used, they are in the service of deepening participation.
 Market forces will apply P2P-like protocols which are proprietary, secret,
 restricted, and are opposed to this aim of participation.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
3.4.C.
 P2P and the Commons
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Eric Raymond's landmark description of the Open Source model, i.e.
 ‘Cathedral and the Bazaar’ (Raymond, 2001), compares the different methodologie
s to produce software.
 Corporate software production methods are called ‘the Cathedral’, i.e.
 a big planned and bureaucratic project, while open source is coined a ‘bazaar’,
 a free process of cooperation involving many participants, but the concept
 also implies connotations with the free market idea.
 An argument to the contrary may be that the internet and many open source
 projects own their existence to the public sector, which financed internet
 research and the salaries of participating scientists.
 And the so-called ‘bazaar’ is at best a very indirect way to make money,
 since most of the use value generated by peer production does not easily
 translate into exchange value, which is most cases is derived from services
 and not from the ‘peer product’ itself! Moreover, in actual practice, the
 building of Cathedrals were massive collective projects, initiated by the
 Church but drawing on popular fervor, a competition in gift giving, and
 lots of volunteer labor!!! When we define P2P processes as a form of Communal
 Shareholding, the process is a lot less confused.
 What people are doing is voluntarily and cooperatively constructing a commons,
 according to the ‘communist principle’ (described by Marx in his definition
 of the last phase of history): ‘from each according to his abilities, to
 each according to his needs’.
 Recognition of this non-recirprocal aspect of peer production is crucial
 to understand the specifities of this new mode.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Since the famous opinion storm generated by Bill Gates charge that copyright
 reformers were ‘communists’ , it is important to stress specifically what
 we are talking about when we use the concept of communism as related to
 P2P.
 Let’s therefore not confuse the utopian definition of Marx, to be realized
 at the ‘end of history’ after a transitionary socialist phase still marked
 with recipropicity, with the actual practices of the Soviet Union, which
 were centralized, authoritarian and totalitarian, one of the more pernicious
 forms of social domination.
 Using Fiske’s grammar of relationships, we could say that the Soviet system
 or ‘really existing socialism’, consisted of the following combination:
 1) property belonged to the state, but was in fact controlled by an elite
 social fraction, the nomenclatura, and did not function as common property;
 2) the economic practices were a combined form of equality matching and
 market pricing, though the monetary prices were most frequently determined
 not by an open market, but by political and planning authorities; 3) there
 was no free participation but obligatory hierarchical cooperation; 4) socially,
 there was a very strong element of authority ranking, with one’s status
 largely determined by one’s function in the nomenclatura.
 The reason of course is that these systems arose in a context of social
 and material scarcity and deprivation, inevitably given rise to a process
 of monopolization of power for the control of scarce resources.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In contrast, Marx’s definition was predicated on abundance in the material
 world.
 If P2P emerges according to this very definition, it is because of a sufficient
 material base, which allows the types of volunteer labor P2P thrives on
 (and pays the wages of a substantial part of them), as well as the abundance
 inherent in the informational sphere of non-rival goods with near-zero
 transaction costs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But since peer to peer is not a ideology nor utopian project, but an actual
 social practice which responds to true social needs, it can be practiced
 by anyone, despite one’s formal personal philosophy and eventual ideological
 blinders .
 Thus the paradox is that American libertarians call it a market, while
 the European digital left calls it a ‘really existing anarcho-communist
 practice’ (Gorz, 2003), though they are speaking of the same process.
 The libertarian theorists associated with the Open Source movement, can
 argue that there is a continuity and linkage between FLOSS philosophy and
 traditional liberal thought on property and community, while neo- and post-Marx
ist interpreters will stress how it transcends the norms of property and
 commodification.
 Since peer to peer involves both an application of freedom and of equality,
 it has the potential to attract supporters of both the left and the right,
 to the extent that they are faithful to their respective ideals.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lawrence Lessig’s apparently tongue-in-cheek suggestion (in reply to Bill
 Gates equating copyright reforms with communism), to call the P2P movement’s
 advocates ‘Common-ists’, not a bad concept at all.
 Commonism is in fact a growing movement for the protection and expansion
 for the existing physical commons; for the creation and expansion of an
 expanded Information Commons and public domain; and against the deepening
 of intellectual property restrictions which disable the continued existence
 of the 'free culture development', which is a condition for the further
 development of P2P.
 How does the new 'informational commons' differ from the traditional 'physical'
 commons.
 The physical commons is about scarce 'rival' goods, and creates, under
 certain conditions, problems of abuse (the 'Tragedy of the Commons') and
 fair 'entitlements', necessitating regulation, problems which are much
 less acute, if not non-existent, in the sphere of overabundant information
 resources, though of course free and easy access to networks is by no means
 assured for the totality of the world population.
 The traditional commons, which still exists in the South amongst the native
 populations, is essentially 'local' and distinguishes itself by this community
 focus, which is contrasted from both centralized state property and resource
 management, and private property.
 They are 'limited access commons' in the sense that they are reserved for
 particular local communities (like pasture systems or irrigation systems).
 It is 'territorial' and driven by location-specific actors.
 However, given the severity of the ecological crises, the local Commons
 are also moving towards a global context.
 There are also important 'open access' commons which are open to all and
 either national (highway systems) or global in scope (air, oceans).
 They are in the process of becoming more and more dominated by scarcity
 paradigms however, due to the degradation of the resources of the biosphere.
 This means that from non-regulated, because of their initial abundance,
 they are moving towards being regulated physical commons.
 It has been suggested by Commons-advocate Peter Barnes that the best way
 to manage such physical commons, might be through ‘trusts’, a legal form
 that carries with it the obligation to preserve that capital, which can
 be financial, or physical, ensuring that the next generations have access
 to at least the same resource base.
 In addition, traditional physical Commons can be usefully divided around
 two significant axis: open vs.
 limited access, and non-regulated vs.
 regulated.
 This is also an issue which fails to arise with nonrival goods associated
 with an Information Commons (unless the goal is political and censorship
 is desired).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What distinguishes these Commons from markets is the property regime, and
 they arise mostly in situations where network externalities make them the
 preferable option (the more they are used, the more value they obtain,
 and the more useful they become).
 In technical terms: "they have increasing returns to scale on the demand
 side".
 The initial investment may be very high, and not of interest to any private
 investor, i.e.
 roads, but once they are build, their value increases by usage and the
 additional cost by user becomes marginal.
 The Information Commons is by contrast global in its essence and from the
 start, organized around affinity groups.
 These may sometimes have a local aspect (Wikicities) but are always open
 to worldwide participation.
 Information Commons projects are driven by cyber-collectives.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I would think it likely that in a future civilisational model, both gift
 economy and Commons-based models would be complementary.
 P2P will function most easily where there is a sphere of abundance, in
 the sphere of non-rival goods, while gift economy models may bean alternative
 model to manage scarcity, in the sphere of rival goods and resources.
 As my own preliminary ideal in this research project, I envision the future
 civilization to have a core of P2P processes, surrounded by a layer of
 gift and fair trade applications, and with a market that operates based
 upon the principles of 'natural capitalism', as outlined by authors such
 as Hazel Henderson, David Korten and Paul Hawken, i.e.
 a market which has integrated 'externalities' (environmental and social
 costs) to arrive at true costing.
 We may also want to look at the now forgotten tradition of 'markets without
 capitalism', a tradition that was stronger before World War II .
 Yochai Benkler has perhaps done the most serious work in delineating the
 respective optimal usage of 'sharing' vs.
 market economies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All this moreover with the continued use, and perhaps even strengthening
 of existing public institutions which intervene whenever the 3 above do
 not arrive at adequate solutions in terms of the public good.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
4.
 P2P in the Political Sphere
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4.1.A.
 The Alterglobalisation Movement
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The alterglobalisation movement is a well-known example of the P2P ethos
 at work in the political field.
 The movement sees itself as a network of networks that combines players
 from a wide variety of fields and opinions , who, despite the fact that
 they do no see eye to eye on every aspect, manage to unite around a common
 platform of action around certain key events .
 They are able to mobilize vast numbers of people from every continent,
 without having at their disposal any of the traditional newsmedia, such
 as televisions, radios or newspapers.
 Rather, they rely almost exclusively on the P2P technologies described
 above .
 Thus internet media are used for communication and learning on a continuous
 basis, prior to the mobilizations, but also during the mobilizations, where
 independent internet media platforms such as Indymedia, as well as the
 skillful use of mobile phones are used for real-time response management
 , undertaken by small groups that use buddy-list technologies, sometimes
 open source programs that have been explicitly designed for political activism
 such as TextMob .
 Many reports have appeared, including those described in Howard Rheingold’s
 Smart Mobs, about the political significance of SMS in organizing successful
 protests and ‘democratic revolutions’ .
 The network model allows for a more fluid organization that does not fix
 any group in permanent adversarial positions, but various temporary coalitions
 are created on a ad hoc basis depending on the issues.
 A key underlying philosophy of the movement is the paradigm of non-representati
onality .
 Instead of representation, the movement has been experimenting with a wide
 variety of new organizational formats such as the social forums themselves
 .
 These have to navigate the tension between being a space for dialogue and
 socialization, and retaining efficiency in action, i.e.
 uniting around common projects.
 And this double objective had to be attained while respecting three basic
 horizontal constraints: 1) the continued ability to extend the network
 and hence maintenance of diversity; 2) the refusal of representation; 3)
 decision-making by consensus only .
 Contrary to previous movements in the past, who also started operating
 in a peer-like manner but then either 'institutionalized' themselves to
 survive or dissolved, the alterglobalisation movement seems to move in
 a opposite direction: towards a further consolidation of its radical P2P
 premises .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The appearance of the paradigm of non-representationality is an important
 social innovation that should not go unnoticed and is at the heart of the
 philosophical underpinning of the P2P worldview.
 In classic modern political ideology, participating members elect representativ
es, and delegate their authority to them.
 Decisions taken by councils of such representatives then can take binding
 decisions, and are allowed to speak ‘for the movement’.
 But such a feature seems to be absent from the alterglobalisation movement.
 In fact, article 5 of the Porto Alegre World Social Forum charter specifically
 states that the movement does not ‘represent’ global civil society .
 No one, not even the celebrities, can speak for anyone else, though they
 can speak in their own name.
 Again, some movements and people have more influence than others, but none
 can be said to dominate or direct the movement as such.
 Another distinguishing feature, is that we can no longer speak of ‘permanent
 organizations’.
 While unions, political movements, and international environmental and
 human rights NGO’s do participate, and have an important role, the movement
 innovates by mobilizing many unaffiliated individuals, as well as all kinds
 of temporary ad hoc groups created within or without the internet.
 Thus we can add to the de-formalization and de-institutionalization principles
 explained above, another one that we could call the process of de-organization,
 as long as we are clear on its meaning, which refers to the transcendence
 of ‘fixed’ organizational formats which allows power to consolidate.
 What we get instead is 'shifting and dynamic structures'.
 However, it is important to stress that the use of flexible structures
 does not mean structurelessness .
 Peer governance uses different formats that share as a common characteristic
 that it aims for power to be distributed to a maximum extent.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The adherents of such movements are most often post-ideological in their
 approach; they stress their difference, refuse 'permanent identification'
 with any particular movement, but at the same time try to overcome their
 differences through the common action.
 We have evolved from a 'stamp it' militancy (from the stamps that party
 members used to put in a membership booklet as proof of payment) which
 indicated a lifelong ideological commitment, to a 'post-it' neo-militancy,
 where these new types of organizations do not even propose membership .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A commonly heard criticism is that ‘they have no alternative’, i.e.
 are not offering a precise and integrated alternative political and social
 program.
 This in fact may reflect their new approach to politics.
 The main demand is indeed not always for specifics, though that can occasionall
y be part of a consensus platform (such as ‘abandoning the debt for developing
 countries’), more importantly is the underlying philosophy, that ‘another
 world is possible’, but that what is most important is not asking for specific
 alternative, but rather for an open process of world governance that is
 not governed by the power politics and private interests of the elite,
 but determined by all the people in an autonomous fashion that recognized
 the wide diversity of desired futures.
 Thus, in that sense, the 'aim' of the alterglobalisation movement is nothing
 else than a demand for a new 'organization' of the world, based on the
 P2Pprinciples.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important aspect of the alterglobalisation movement is the above-mentioned
 reliance on alternative independent internet media.
 Despite the overriding influence of corporate-owned mass media, groups
 such as the alterglobalisation movement have succeeded in created a vast
 number of alternative news outlets, in written, audio, and audiovisual
 formats.
 Those are used for a permanent process of learning and exchange, outside
 of the sphere of the ‘manufacturing of consent’ (as described by Noam Chomsky,
 2002).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Of course, the new method of organization that we described above, is not
 limited to movements on the left of the political spectrum, and can be
 found on the right as well.
 One often noted example is Al Qaeda , which mixes tribal, corporate but
 also strong network features; another example is the leaderless resistance
 model advocated by some on the extreme right.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4.1.B.
 The ‘Coordination’ format
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Since the mid-eighties, observers have noticed that social struggles have
 taken a new format as well, that of the coordination .
 In France for example, all the important struggles of the recent decade,
 by nurses, by the educational workers, and most recently by the part-time
 art workers (the 'intermittents'), have been led by such coordinations.
 Again, such coordinations are a radical innovation.
 They are also based on the principle of non-representationality: no one
 is elected to represent anybody else, anyone can participate, their decisions
 are based on consensus, while participants retain every freedom in their
 actions.
 Note how the coordination thus differs from the earlier hyper-democratic
 form of worker’s councils, which were still based on the idea of representation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The latest struggle of the artistic ‘intermittents’ was particularly significant.
 These are creative knowledge workers who move from artistic project to
 artistic project, and who are therefore, unlike earlier industrial workers,
 not in permanent contact with each other.
 Yet their ‘network sociality’, which means they keep in touch with a variety
 of subgroups of friends and associates to keep informed of opportunities
 and for permanent collective learning and exchange, meant that, when confronted
 with a reform they found intolerable, they were able to mount one of the
 most effective mass social movements in a very short time, through the
 use of viral diffusion techniques.
 Traditional power plays by established left political parties and unions
 are not tolerated in the coordinations, when they happen, people simply
 leave and set up shop elsewhere.
 Thus authoritarian political organizations are seriously restrained by
 this format.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The coordination format aims to preserve 'difference', does not strive for
 'unity' and 'centralization' of the struggle, but achieves nevertheless
 'common' goals and actions.
 However, in contrast with the earlier forms of 'mass demonstrations' and
 'mass strikes', the coordination-led struggles are often organized in a
 'just-in-time' fashion of autonomous micro-actions, often geared to the
 interrupting of the 'machine of the spectacle', i.e.
 the mass media, transport flows, and the culture industry.
 It is very similar to the approach of the alterglobalisation movement,
 which chooses heavily covered summits as focal points of action.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The alterglobalisation movement and the coordination format are not flukes,
 but representative of a much more general way of doing politics, which
 has also been called the 'network-advocacy model' .
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4.1.C.
 Peer Governance as a third mode of governance
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In 3.4.A, we have used the typology of intersubjective relations by Alan Page
 Fiske.
 Two points are important here: First, no society or civilization can survive
 through reliance on any one mode, they have always co-existed.
 But we can also see that the different modes of civilization are dominated
 by one particular mode, and this particular mode will put its mark on all
 others, molding them on its own image.
 For example, the tribal mode of organization, the gift economy, was based
 on reciprocity, i.e.
 Equality Matching.
 The agrarian mode was mostly based on Authority Ranking, and capitalism
 is of course the society where Market Pricing becomes dominant.
 If there is to be a Peer to Peer Era, our hypothesis is that it will be
 dominated by Communal Shareholding, i.e.
 the institutional form of the Commons will be what is central.
 That the dominant form recasts the other forms to its image can be seen
 for example in how the common property of the Church was embedded in the
 hierarchical structure of the Church institution.
 And in capitalist society in how the hierarchical state apparatus is subsumed
 by the defense of private interests.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We can therefore expect that peer to peer will mold not only autonomous
 peer production, but also the market and the state.
 We therefore want to distinguish pure modes of peer governance, from the
 adaptation of existing governance models to the peer to peer mode.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Following Bob Jessop, we will define peer governance as follows:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"[Peer] Governance is defined as the reflexive self-organisation of independent
 actors involved in complex relations of reciprocal interdependence, with
 such self-organisation being based on continuing dialogue and resource-sharing
 to develop mutually beneficial joint projects and to manage the contradictions
 and dilemmas inevitably involved in such situations.
 Governance organised on this basis need not entail a complete symmetry
 in power relations or complete equality in the distribution of benefits:
 indeed, it is highly unlikely to do so almost regardless of the object
 of governance or the ‘stakeholders’ who actually participate in the governance
 process.
 All that is involved in this preliminary definition is the commitment on
 the part of those involved to reflexive self-organisation in the face of
 complex reciprocal interdependence."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first aspect is to be found in the increasing amount of peer governance
 of autonomous groups.
 Peer production is not just an economic process, it is a political process,
 as these projects have to be managed, albeit in a distributed way.
 The principle of self-regulation of peer groups, which by definition create
 new use value for the commons, should of course not be confused with the
 self-regulation by the market, where individual agents are only looking
 out for their own interests, and not for the public good, which is of course
 not to say that it should be rejected in all cases.
 Bob Jessop insists on the difference of self-reflexivity amongst participants
 in peer groups, something absent in the ‘invisible hand’ of the market.
 Nevertheless, even for P2P groups we can envisage a role of arbitrage by
 the state, to make sure that P2P groups do not damage the public interests,
 however defined.
 There is still a legitimate difference to be made between peer governance
 as dealing with a subset of interests, and the state as guarantor of the
 ‘general interest’ of society as a whole .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the strengths of the liberal tradition today is that it speaks to
 the desire for autonomy of democratic subjects, who in many cases, feel
 this autonomy is more threatened by the bureaucracy of the state, than
 by the behavior of for-profit companies.
 Finding alternatives for bureaucratization is therefore an important part
 of the evolution towards P2P models.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Peer governance als has a second more expanded definition and application,
 as a mode of governance that can be applied in the real world, as a true
 alternative to the top-down and hierarchical state form of government,
 and can be applied whenever there are interdependent and multiple stakeholders
 involved.
 He has outlined a consensus among scholars that four conditions are required
 to make it applicable successfully:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
“Studies suggest that there are four conditions for effective reflexive
 self-organisation: (a) simplifying models and practices, which reduce the
 complexity of the world but are still congruent with real world processes
 and relevant to actors' objectives; (b) developing the capacity for dynamic,
 interactive social learning among autonomous but interdependent agencies
 about causal processes and forms of interdependence, attributions of responsibi
lity and capacity for actions, and possibilities of co-ordination in a complex,
 turbulent environment; (c) building methods for co-ordinating actions across
 social forces with different identities, interests, and meaning systems,
 over different spatio-temporal horizons, and over different domains of
 action; and (d) establishing a common world view for individual action
 and a system of ‘metagovernance’ to stabilise key players' orientations,
 expectations, and rules of conduct."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How then will the state be molded by peer to peer? Peer governance is characteri
zed by the relational paradigm .
 Rather than seeing itself as sovereign master, the state must be seen as
 embedded in relationships, and as in need of respecting these multiple
 relationships.
 This is probably best translated by the concept of multistakeholdership.
 We can probably expect that the nation-state, along with the newly emerging
 sub- and supraregional structures will continue to exist, but that their
 policies will be set through a dialogue with stakeholders.
 The key will be to disembed the state from its primary reliance of the
 private sector, and to make it beholden to civil society, i.e.
 the commons, so that it can act as a center of arbitrage.
 Despite the recent greater subsumption of the state to private interests
 (in the neoliberal era) – which of course has never been total since the
 balance of forces is not based on a complete defeat of the citizenship
 -- many supraregional institutes, and in particular non-state governance
 institutions such as the standards bodies, but also policy-making at the
 U.N., already exhibit many features of multistakeholdership.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What we describe is of course an ideal state of affairs, requiring a new
 balance of power in society.
 Failing such a change, in the asymmetrical world of power relationship
 that we live in today, any multistakeholdership relation will be marked
 by such unbalances, and fail to reach the ideal of self-reflexivity in
 the context of equipotential relations.
 What can be achieved in peer groups today, cannot be achieved by extending
 the model to the whole of society.
 In the text that we are citing, Bob Jessop examines in detail the potential
 failure points of the interplay between peer governance and the state.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The market will also be greatly influenced (and of course already is), and
 will change more radically in a P2P-dominated political economy.
 It is a legitimate expectation, or hope, that the recent evolution from
 a market economy to a market society, in which every social relationship
 is in the process of being monetized, could partially or even largely be
 undone as civil society re-asserts itself.
 New types of businesses will emerge that embed more clearly P2P principles.
 It is to be expected that in many areas the authoritarian structures and
 practices will have to adapt, as the age of participation will want to
 extend the principle of self-rule to the productive sphere.
 As the concept of multistakeholdersship will be more strongly asserted,
 corporate governance will no longer be able to ignore its workers, consumers,
 and associated communities, including the voices of the natural environment.
 The increased demands for transparency, and their enablement by technology,
 will also impose changes in corporate behavior and structures.
 There are of course many aspects to this question, such as whether an alternati
ve to the current capitalist system is possible or even desirable, but this
 will be discussed elsewhere.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But peer governance remains a clear alternative.
 If market allocation and corporate hierarchy are the governance model of
 the market, associated with private property; and if bureaucracy is associated
 with the state model of governance, then peer governance is clearly the
 alternative being forged by civil society.
 It will emerge in its pure form in P2P groups, but its associated values
 such as relationality (and transparency) will clearly force an adaptation
 of both market and the state.
 This is why we will say elsewhere in the text that one of the key goals
 of a P2P movement will be, or should be, 'For a Commons-based Society with
 a reformed market and state'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The assertion of peer governance as an alternative model, either in the
 current situation and/or in any future commons-based society, i.e.
 a society that will still inevitably be marked by a pluralism of governance
 models consisting of peer governance/ market allocation / and what Jessop
 calls ‘imperative coordination’, with doses of reciprocity-based gift economies
 thrown in, creates a problem of ‘meta-governance’, which has also already
 been discussed by Bob Jessop.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He distinguishes the following levels, which we reproduce in full in the
 endnotes .
 What is important is to distinguish meta-heterarchy, i.e.
 the coordination of different levels of peer governance, from meta-governance
 as the coordination of the different forms of governance/government.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
- Meta-exchange as “the reflexive redesign of individual markets", i.e.
 how can different types of markets and scales of market be co-ordinated?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
- Meta-organisation, as “the reflexive redesign of organisations, the creation
 of intermediating organisations, the reordering of inter-organisational
 relations, and the management of organisational ecologies".
 We could generalize that also to the problematic of meta-hierarchy, how
 the different levels of local, state, supreregional and global state forms
 interrelate.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
- Meta-heterarchy, “this involves the organisation of the conditions of
 self-organisation by redefining the framework for heterarchy or reflexive
 self-organisation."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
- Meta-governance, “This involves re-articulating and ‘collibrating’ the
 different modes of governance… , [i.e.] the judicious mixing of market, hierarchy
, and networks to achieve the best possible outcomes from the viewpoint
 of those engaged in metagovernance"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The respective influence of peer governance on market and state is summarized
 by Jessop in the following way, and echoes what we have said about it supra:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
“On the one hand, market competition will be balanced by co-operation, the
 invisible hand will be combined with a visible handshake.
 On the other hand, the state is no longer the sovereign authority.
 It becomes just one participant among others in the pluralistic guidance
 system and contributes its own distinctive resources to the negotiation
 process.
 As the range of networks, partnerships, and other models of economic and
 political governance expand, official apparatuses remain at best first
 among equals.The state's involvement would become less hierarchical, less
 centralised, and less directive in character.
 The exchange of information and moral suasion become key sources of legitimatio
n and the state's influence depends as much on its role as a prime source
 and mediator of collective intelligence as on its command over economic
 resources or legitimate coercion ." 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4.1.D.
 Peer governance in peer production?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How does peer governance work in actual peer production processes, in free
 software/open source projects by example?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Aaron Krowne has done useful work to define the authority models at work
 in such projects.
 The models define access and the workflow, and whether there is any quality
 control.
 The free-form model, which Wikipedia employs, allows anyone to edit any
 entry at any time.
 But in the owner-centric model, entries can only be modified with the permissio
n of a specific ‘owner’ who has to defend the integrity of his module.
 He concludes that “These two models have different assumptions and effects.
 The free-form model connotes more of a sense that all users are on the
 “same level," and that expertise will be universally recognized and deferred
 to.
 As a result, the creator of an entry is spared the trouble of reviewing
 every change before it is integrated, as well as the need to perform the
 integration.
 By contrast, the owner-centric authority model assumes the owner is the
 de facto expert in the topic at hand, above all others, and all others
 must defer to them.
 Because of this arrangement, the owner must review all modification proposals,
 and take the time to integrate the good ones.
 However, no non-expert will ever be allowed to “damage" an entry, and therefore
 resorting to administrative powers is vanishingly rare." The owner-centric
 model is better for quality, but takes more time, while the free-form model
 increases scope of coverage and is very fast.
 The choice between the two models can of course be a contentious issue.
 In the case of the Wikipedia, the adherents of the owner-centric model,
 active in the pre-Wikipedia "Nupedia" model, lost out, and presumable,
 the success of Wikipedia has proven them wrong, since the latter totally
 open process has been proven a success .
 Similar conflicts are reported in many other projects .
 Collaborative projects are no utopian scheme were everything is better,
 but subject to intense human conflict as well.
 A general problem still associated with FLOSS software is their lack of
 user-friendliness , they are often made from the biases of a development
 community, and may have less incentive than corporate entities, to make
 them customer-friendly, which is why a niche has been created for service
 companies such as Red Hat.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another important aspect of FLOSS projects is how they handle 'equipotentiality'.
 While formal degrees have been abandoned, and open participation is in
 principle encouraged, most projects will over time produce a number of
 rules in their selection.
 The important aspect is that these rules are generated within the community
 itself, though mostly in the early phases.
 After a while, they tend to consolidate and they are a given for the new
 participants who come later .
 At this point, a process of socialization is crucial to eventual acceptance
 .
 The process is akin to the tradition of artisanship, which has been used
 in the three-degree system of original freemasonry as well: apprentice,
 companion (fellow craft), master.
 But it is implied rather than formalized.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Crucial to the success of many collaborative projects is their implementation
 of the reputation schemes.
 They differ from previous reputation-based systems, such as academic peer
 review, because the open process of participation (equipotentiality) precludes
 a systematic strengthening of reputation so that it could become a factor
 of conservatism (as it is in science and its dependence on dominant paradigms)
 and power.
 In the better P2P systems, reputation is time-sensitive on the degree of
 recent participation and the possibility of forking and of downgrading
 reputation grades, introduce an aspect of community control, flexibility
 and dynamism.
 See in particular the endnote on this topic, outlining the example of the
 NoLogo site .
 Reputation-based schemes are crucial because cooperation is based on trust,
 and they offer a collaborative scheme to indicate those who are the best
 contributors to the common value, while motivating everybody to use the
 more cooperative, and less the more baser sides of human nature.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4.1.E.
 New conceptions of social and political struggle
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The change in political practices has been reflected by new thinking in
 the field of political theory.
 Among the thinkers that come to mind are Toni Negri and Michael Hardt,
 with their books Empire and Multitude, Miguel Benasayag with his book “Le
 Contre-Pouvoir", and John Holloway with ‘Revolution Without Power’.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Negri/Hardt have (re-)introduced the concept of Multitude.
 Unlike the earlier concept of People or proletariat, multitudes do not
 have a synthetic unity.
 They exist in their differences.
 What is rejected is abstract human identity in favor of the organization
 for common goals of concrete humanity in its differences .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Their concept is derived from the Enlightenment debate between Hobbes and
 Spinoza.
 Hobbes, pioneering thinker moving away from conceptions of divine order
 towards those of natural order, said that society consists of multitudes
 of equals, marked by different and contradictory desires and interests
 making them unable to constitute a society by themselves.
 In the state of nature, it’s war of all against all.
 Thus, to constitute society, they have to give away their power, to a sovereign
 to whom they give the power to rule and to create social order.
 This eventually becomes ‘uniting as a people’, in order to create a “nation-sta
te", with representative democracy.
 But the unity comes at a price, not only does inclusion in the nation-state
 imply exclusion of others, but within, those who partake had to give away
 their power.
 Thus, political power is transcendent vs.
 the immanent power of the multitude, it rules ‘over them’.
 It is this characteristic of modernity which is falling away today: taking
 his clue from the more positive description of the multitude and their
 desires by Spinoza, which represents a counter-trend and thus a ‘alternative
 modernity’, Spinoza and Negri maintain that the multitudes can rule themselves,
 in a fully immanent way, by themselves, refusing any transcendence of their
 power.
 Theirs is a politics without representation, centered around the notion
 of non-representationality.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Unlike the concept of People, which unifies but also rejects the non-People,
 the multitude is totally open and global from the outset.
 In terms of political strategy, they develop concepts like ‘Exodus’, which
 means no longer facing the enemy directly (in a network configuration of
 social movements, there is no direct enemy and in Empire ‘there is no there
 there’, i.e.
 the enemy cannot be precisely located as it is a network itself), but to
 route around obstacles and more importantly to refuse to give consent and
 legitimation by constructing alternatives in real-time, through networks.
 It is only when the multitudes are under direct attack, through reforms
 that are experienced as ‘intolerable’, that the network is galvanized into
 struggle, and that the very format of organizing prefigures already the
 society to come.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Essential components of the multitude are the knowledge workers, affective
 ‘service’ workers, and other forms of immaterial labor.
 Miguel Benasayag similarly argues that ‘to resist is to create’, and that
 political struggle is essentially about the construction of alternatives,
 here and now.
 Current practice has to reflect the desired future, and has to emerge,
 not from the ‘sad passions’ of hate and anger, but from the joys of producing
 a commons.
 The Hacker Manifesto is another important expression of this new ethos.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
John Holloway frames a very similar sensibility it into a new conception
 of temporality.
 The traditional left used 'capitalist time-frames' he charges.
 First waiting, for the next reform, for the revolution, and 'then' all
 will be different.
 But instead of taking power, which makes 'us' become like 'them', and creates
 new asymmetries, we should be 'building power', combining two temporalities:
 first, the temporality of refusal, the 'exodus' if you like, but simultaneously
, build the world you desire 'now'.
 Capitalism exists not because it was once created, but because we are making
 it every day.
 He stresses that what is needed is not 'counter-power', but 'anti-power'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Though none of these authors explicitly use the peer to peer concept, their
 own concepts reflect its philosophy and practice, and they are generally
 in tune with the themes of the peer to peer advocates (such as favoring
 an information commons, support for free software and open source methodologies
, etc…).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A recent explicitly participatory political philosophy is being developed
 by a group of authors such as Mitch Ratcliffe, and is called Extreme Democracy
 .
 It is neither representative nor direct democracy but a proposal to have
 totally open participation in networks responsible for policymaking.
 The concept of 'Extreme' in this context, is related to the concept of
 'extreme programming', a rapid, small-team like P2P process of producing
 software.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4.1.F.
 New lines of contention: Information Commons vs.
 New Enclosures
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next to new forms of political organization, new conceptions regarding the
 tactics and strategies of struggle, the emergence of peer to peer also
 generates new conflicts, which are different from those of the industrial
 age.
 Just as the industrial mode of relations created the labor movement and
 the idea that the workers could own the means of production, the new social
 formation creates a movement that is favoring the common construction of
 a Information Commons, associated not with state property or “nationalization",
 but with universal common access property regimes.
 Positively, what binds many different social and political movements today
 is their focus on ‘open access’: to software code (open sources), to scientific
 information (open access to archives, open science), to the traditional
 knowledge of humanity (the movement against biopiracy), against the privatizati
on of human life (privatization of the genome ).
 One gets the distinct impression that our current political economy, originally
 designed to manage scarcity in order to overcome it, is changing into a
 system that seeks to permanently create artificial scarcity, in order to
 create knowledge monopolies and dependencies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The key conflict is therefore the one about the freedom to construct the
 Information Commons , which encompasses what was traditionally called the
 ‘public domain’ , as against the private appropriation of knowledge by
 for-profit firms .
 All these different Commons-related struggle share common characteristics,
 and Philippe Aigrain has examined, in his book 'Cause Commune' (Aigrain,
 2005), how these different forces can unite in common struggle .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
According to the Hacker Manifesto by McKenzie Wark, the deeper reason and
 underlying common logic between these different struggles is the struggle
 for control of both information (as intellectual property) and the vectors
 of information (needed for distribution), between those that produce informatio
n, knowledge and innovation (the hacker class, knowledge workers), and the
 groups that own the vectors (the vector class), through which its exchange
 value can be realized.
 This same vision of a class struggle between the producers of information
 and those that want to resell prepackaged bits of it for sale back to consumers
, is shared by Joel de Rosnay who speaks of ‘pronetarians vs.
 infocapitalists’.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The last 30 years have indeed seen an enormous extension of Intellectual
 Property Rights, resulting in a severe weakening of the Scientific Commons,
 a variety of detrimental social effects, while new technical developments
 such as Digital Rights Management threaten the development of a free culture.
 Cognitive capitalism is centered around the accumulation of knowledge assets,
 and has altered the classic cycle of consumption and production.
 In the industrial economy this cycle was described as conception-production-dis
tribution- consumption.
 In this economy, over time, competition would arise, making the products
 cheaper, forcing corporations to become either more productive or invent
 new products.
 In the new economy, the cycle is better described as conception – reproduction
 of the informational basis – production – distribution – consumption.
 The informational basis, whether it is software, cultural content, or material
 products such as seeds in agribusiness, molecules and gene sequences in
 the pharmaceutical industry, are protected through information property
 rights.
 The aspect of production and distribution is no longer central, and can
 be easily outsourced.
 This mechanism has now extended to vast sectors of the 'material economy'
 with companies such as Nike and Alcatel as companies that are essentially
 divested of material production, but are centered around their knowledge
 and other immaterial assets (essentially 'branding')
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Through this mechanism of IP protection, super-profits can be maintained,
 common pools of knowledge are destroyed and appropriated, and innovation
 is slowed down.
 In agribusiness, seeds lose their productive qualities after a generation,
 rendering farmers completely dependent, while inflated prices created debt
 cycles.
 With GMO's, an era of total dependence of agriculture towards agribusiness
 is set in motion.
 In pharmaceuticals, the inflated prices of medication are one of the key
 factors of the crisis of the welfare state, while millions of patients
 are excluded from appropriate care, especially in the South.
 A 2001 study of Doctors Without Border showed that only one percent of
 the molecules being studies, concerned the most prevalent diseases in the
 South (malaria, TBC, etc..) The most well-known case is of course the controversy
 around AIDS treatments, where millions of patients are unnecessarily dying
 because they are not allowed access to generic drugs.
 The software patenting which originated in the U.S.
 and has been copied in Europe makes it now possible to protect ideas and
 any logical sequence (which includes business processes) and is widely
 seen as an impediment for further innovation, since it excludes small companies
 who lack the means of taking the licenses, while leading to an explosion
 of litigation.
 American reforms which have allowed universities to privatize and patent
 their scientific knowledge and have severely endangered cooperation amongst
 scientists.
 Finally, exploding prices of scientific publications have rendered access
 to scientific knowledge more difficult.
 At the core of the conflict over IP are also deeply differing ideological
 conceptions of cultural creation.
 IP proponents see creation in terms of market, with creators investing
 time and capital into cultural products destined for the marketplace, and
 with the motive and incentive being the profit protected by IP rights;
 proponents of the Information Commons have a more social vision of creation,
 seeing how every creator is dependent on the community of creators that
 preceded and exists alongside of them.
 IP by restricting access to the common pool, impedes creation and innovation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is this intensive effort at the private appropriation of knowledge that
 has created different movements of resistance.
 The free software movement, the movements of farmers against biopiracy
 in seeds and animal and vegetal types, where Western corporations are privatizi
ng the fruits of thousands of year of communal cooperation; the movement
 of patients and developmental organizations for access to reasonably priced
 medicines and medical knowledge; the movement for free access to scientific
 publications, are all related reactions to these New Enclosures.
 Slowly, ever larger segments of the public started to realize that the
 new forms of Intellectual Property were no longer based on a compromise
 between the interests of consumers, creators and publishing intermediaries,
 but had been extended to favor information property monopolies, who were
 also threatening to own and control life itself.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the same time as the existing Information and Scientific Commons were
 threatened, the internet has created an enormous bottom-up movement, through
 peer production and knowledge collectives, through microcontent and generalized
 knowledge exchange of millions of people, thereby creating a new Information
 Commons.
 It is the merger of the concerns of the already existing resistance groups,
 and the realization of the meaning of the process of peer to peer content
 creation, which is at the core of a new political movement associated with
 the peer to peer social formation, inspired by the vision of a re-invigorated
 Commons.
 By extension, this realization has led to connections with those forces
 protecting the already existing physical commons (water, air, transportation
 systems), and the surviving common property forms in the South, which are
 still strong amongst some native peoples.
 Both type of movements are similarly concerned with resistance against
 the extension of the movement towards private appropriation and the market
 .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A crucial development to bring all of this to generalized public consciousness,
 especially amongst the new generations, was the development of filesharing.
 A process that always existed amongst groups of friends,that of sharing
 cultural enjoyment and creation, is now extended in scope by technology.
 This endangers the intellectual property system which favors large monopolies,
 much less the authors and content creators which are at a disadvantage
 in the current IP system.
 Moreover, the P2P system of music distribution is inherently more productive
 and versatile, and more pleasing to the listener of music than the older
 system of physically distributing CD’s.
 It is around this development that the regressive nature of cognitive capitalis
m has been most glaring since it has led to an all-out war against its own
 consumers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Indeed, instead of building a common pool for the world’s music, and finding
 an adequate funding mechanism for the artists , the industry is intent
 to destroy this more productive system, and wants to criminalize sharing
 by punishing the users, and even by attempting to render the technology
 illegal or restricting the free usage of digital technologies through digital
 rights management schemes .
 This would have the effect of not stopping so-called illicit usage, but
 of stopping the general movement of sharing of cultural content, even the
 autonomously created one.
 Another strategy is to incorporate control mechanisms either in software
 (where it can be hacked and circumvented, but that is made illegal as well),
 or in the hardware (digital rights management schemes).
 While the users and producers of free culture are battling the attempts
 at the enclosure of culture by large 'vectoralist' corporations , many
 are working at offering solutions that both protect the use of culture,
 and make it possible for creators to make a living .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Also the forces arrayed start from diametrically opposed paradigms.
 For the entertainment industry, IP is essential to promote creativity,
 even though the current system is a ‘winner-take-all’ system that serves
 only a tiny minority of superstar artists.
 For them, without IP protection, there would be no creativity.
 But as P2P processes demonstrate, which are extraordinarily innovative
 outside the profit system, creativity is what people do when they can freely
 cooperate and share, and hence IP is sometimes seen as an impediment, impeding
 the free use what should be a common resource.
 But what the Commons movement aims at is not abolishing IP, but restoring
 it to its original intention, i.e.
 a social compromise that combines the interests of user communities, creators
 of content needing to make a living, and the reasonable retribution of
 intermediaries which serve in production and distribution.
 It seeks to undo the landgrab that has taken place in the last thirty years,
 and to remedy the grave social problems that have been created (such as
 the lack of access to life-saving medications) by this one-sided appropriation.
 It seeks to avoid that new steps are taken in that process of appropriation,
 refusing that life can be controlled by private interests, and that cultural
 life would be the subject of restrictive licensing and built into the technolog
y itself.
 Lastly, it aims to create the conditions that foster the healthy development
 of a strong Commons.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the meantime, while this political struggle continues, the forces using
 peer to peer are devising their own solutions.
 It started with a legal infrastructure for the free software movement,
 the General Public License, which prohibits the private appropriation of
 such software.
 It continued with the very important Creative Commons initiative initiated
 by Lawrence Lessig, who also supported the creation of a Free Culture advocacy
 movement.
 And it also expressed in the continuous technological development of an
 infrastructure for cooperation and sharing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4.2.A.
 De-Monopolization of Power
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How to explain the emergence of such P2P networks in the political field?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It reflects new cultural values, the desire that authority grows from engagement
 and expertise, and that it is temporary to the task at hand.
 It reflects the refusal to give away autonomy, i.e.
 the rejection of the transcendence of power as defined by Toni Negri.
 It reflects the desire for self-unfolding of creative potential.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Networks are incredibly efficient: they can operate globally in real-time,
 react and mobilize around events in the very short term, and offers access
 to alternative civic information that has not been massaged by corporate-owned
 mega-media.
 In a political network configuration, the participating individual retains
 his full autonomy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Politically, P2P processes reflect a de-monopolization of power.
 Power, in the form of reputation that generates influence, is given by
 the community, is time-bound to the participation of the individual (when
 he no longer participates, influence declines again), and can thus be taken
 back by the participating individuals.
 In the case where monopolization should occur, participants simply leave
 or create a ‘forking’ of the project, a new path is formed to avoid the
 power grab .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There is an important counter-trend however, and it concerns the scarcity
 of attention.
 Because our time and attention are indeed scarce in a context of information
 abundance, mediating portals are created, who collate and digest this mass
 of information.
 Think about Yahoo, Google, Amazon, eBay who exemplify the process of monopoliza
tion in the ‘attention economy’.
 But the user community is not without power to affect these processes:
 collective reaction through opinion storms are activated by abusive monopolisti
c behavior, and can quickly damage the reputation of the perpetrator, thereby
 forcing a change in behavior in the monopolistic ambitions.
 Competing resources are almost always available, or can be built by the
 open source community.
 But more fundamentally, the blogosphere practice shows that it is possible
 to route around such problems, by creating mediating processes using the
 community as a whole.
 Thus techniques such as folksonomies, i.e.
 communal tagging, or reputation ranking, such as the ‘Karma’ points used
 by the Slashdot community, avoid the emergence of autonomous mediating
 agents.
 The blogosphere itself, in the form of the Technorati ranking system for
 example, has found ways to calculate the interlinking done by countless
 individuals, thereby enabling itself to filter out the most used contributions.
 Again, monopolization is excluded.
 What is the mechanism behind this?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For this we have to turn again to the concept of non-representationality,
 or what Negri calls immanence.
 In modernity, the concept is that autonomous individuals cannot create
 a peaceful order, and therefore they defer their power to a sovereign,
 whether it be the king of the nation.
 In becoming a people, they become a ‘collective individual’.
 They loose out as individuals, while the unified people or nation behaves
 ‘as if’ it was an individual, i.e.
 with ambition for power.
 It is ‘transcendent’ vis a vis its parts.
 In non-representationality however, nothing of the sort is given away.
 This means that the collective hereby created, is not a ‘collective individual’
, it cannot act with ambition apart from its members.
 The genius of the protocols devised in peer to peer initiatives, is that
 they avoid the creation of a collective individual with agency.
 Instead, it is the communion of the collective which filters value.
 The ethical implication is important as well.
 Not having given anything up of their full power, the participants in fact
 voluntarily take up the concern not only for the whole in terms of the
 project, but for the social field in which its operates.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anticipating our ‘evolutionary’ remarks in section 4.3, we can see the above
 examples as illustrating the new form of protocollary power, which is becoming
 all-important in a network.
 The very manner in which we devise our social technologies, implies possible
 and likely social relationships.
 The protocols of the blogosphere enable the economy of attention to operate,
 not through individual actors that can become monopolistic, but by protocols
 that enable communal filtering.
 But when used by private firms such as Yahoo and Google, they may have
 a vested interest in skewing the protocol and the objectivity of the algorithms
 used.
 In the blogosphere, protocols are also important since they imply a vision:
 should everyone be able to judge, and in that case, would that not lead
 to a lowest common denominator, or should equipotency be defined in such
 a way that a certain level of expertise is required, to allow higher quality
 entries to be filtered upwards? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4.2.B.
 Equality, Hierarchy, Freedom
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How do P2P processes integrate ‘values’ and ‘social relation’-typologies
 such as equality, hierarchy, and freedom?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Cornelis Castoriadis gives an interpretation of Aristoteles on this issue:
 equality is actually present in all types of society, but it is always
 ‘according to a criteria’.
 (this is so because a society is implicitly a form of exchange, and thus
 in need of comparative standards for such exchange).
 It is over the criteria of exchange that social and political forces are
 fighting.
 Is power to be distributed according to the merit accorded to birth, according
 to military exploits, according to commercial savvy shown in economic life,
 to intelligence? This distribution then inherently creates a conflict with
 the egalitarian demands that is equally constitutive of politics and society.
 The distribution itself creates an exclusion and resulting demands of participa
tion .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the modern sense, equality is defined mostly as an equal right to participati
on in the political process, and as an ‘equality of opportunity’, based
 on merit, in the economic sphere.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Similarly, hierarchy was based in premodern societies based on ‘authority
 ranking’ which depended on fixed social roles, and on the competition within
 these narrowly defined spheres (warriors competing amongst themselves,
 Brahmins competing through their knowledge of sacred scripture).
 The command and control hierarchy is fixed amongst the levels, somewhat
 flexible within the levels.
 In modern society, theoretically, hierarchy in power is derived from electoral
 choice in case of political power, through economic success in case of
 economic power.
 In theory, it is extremely flexible, based on ‘merit’, but in practice
 various processes of monopolization prohibit the full flowering of such
 meritocracy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
World-systems theorist Immanuel Walllerstein defines three important political
 traditions according to their position regarding equality/hierarchy.
 Conservatives want to conserve existing hierarchical relations, as they
 were at a certain point in time; liberals are in favor of a selective meritocra
cy and stress the formalized and institutionalized selection criteria; democrats
 are in favor of maximum inclusion, without formal testing.
 Thus, in the early modern system, conservatives were against elections,
 liberals were for selective census-based elections, democrats for general
 suffrage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How does peer to peer fit in this scheme? P2P is a democratic process of
 full inclusion based on the idea of equipotency.
 It believes that expertise cannot be located beforehand, and thus general
 and open participation is the rule.
 But selection immediately sets in as well, since the equipotency is immediately
 verified by the work on the project.
 Thus there is a selection before the project, and a hierarchy of networks
 is created, where everyone finds his place according to demonstrated potential.
 Within the project, a hierarchy is also immediately created depending on
 expertise, engagement, and the capacity to generate trust.
 But in both cases the hierarchies are fluid, not fixed, and always depend
 on concrete context, the precise task at hand.
 It’s the model of the improvising jazz band, where everyone can in turn
 be the solo-ist or the trendsetter.
 Reputation is generated, but constantly on the move.
 Peer to peer is not anti-hierarchy or even anti-authority, but it is against
 fixed hierarchies and ‘authoritarianism’, the latter defined as the tendency
 to monopolize power, with a will to perpetuate itself and deprive others
 of resources that it wants for itself.
 P2P is for equality of participation, for a natural and flexible hierarchy
 based on real merit and communal consensus.
 That P2P recognizes differences in potential, and thus natural hierarchy,
 does not preclude it from treating participating partners as equal persons.
 In fact research from within the synergistic tradition, which studies the
 practicalities of cooperation, has verified a remarkable fact.
 In free and synergistic cooperation, those groups function best, which
 treats its members ‘as if’ they were equals.
 Therefore, the recognized hierarchy in reputation, talent, engagement,
 etc..
 does not preclude, but if requires an egalitarian environment to blossom.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Some authors, like David Ronfeldt and John Arquila of the Rand Corporation,
 claim we are moving to a ‘cyberocracy’, where power is determined by the
 access to the networks.
 While there is indeed a digital divide that can exclude participation,
 it is important to stress the flexibility inherent in P2P networks, which
 undermines the idea of ‘fixed and monopolistic cyberocracies’.
 Another author, Alexander Bard in Netocracy, argues that capitalism is
 already dead, and that we are already rules by a hierarchy of knowledge-based
 networks.
 At this stage, these are not very convincing arguments, but there is one
 scenario in which they can become possible.
 It has been described by Jeremy Rifkin in ‘The Age of Access’.
 But this scenario of ‘information feudalism’ is predicated on the destruction
 of P2P networks.
 Cognitive capitalism in indeed in the process of trying to increase its
 monopolistic rents on patented digital materials, a strategy which is undermine
d by the filesharing and information sharing on the P2P networks.
 If the industry succeeds in its civil war against its consumers, by integrating
 Digital Rights Management hardware in our very computers, and outlaws sharing
 through legal attacks and imprisonment, then such a scenario is possible.
 At that time we would have only private networks for which a license has
 to be paid, with heavily restrictive usage rules, and no ownership whatsoever
 for the consumer.
 This is indeed a scenario of exclusion for all those who will not be able
 to afford access to the networks.
 Just as in the feudal structure, where 'serf'-farmers did not own the land
 they were working on, we will not own any immaterial product anymore, we'll
 just have severely restricted usage rights, and certainly not the right
 to share.
 But we are far from that situation still, and personally, I do not think
 it is a likely scenario.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At this moment, P2P is ‘winning’ because its solutions are inherently more
 productive and democratic, and it is hard to see any social force, be it
 the large corporations, permanently sabotaging the very technological developme
nts that it needs to survive.
 More likely, barring a scenario of a collapse of civilization and a return
 to barbarity, it is more likely to see a social system evolve that incorporates
 this new level of complexity and participation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One element I have yet to mention is the freedom aspect, which seems obvious.
 P2P is predicated on the maximum freedom.
 The freedom to join and participate, to fully express oneself and one’s
 potential, the freedom to change course at any point in time, the freedom
 to quit.
 Within the common projects, freedom is constrained through communal validation
 and consensus (i.e.
 the freedom of others).
 But individuals can always leave, fork to a new project, create their own.
 The challenge is to find affinities, to create a common sphere with at
 least a few others and to create effective use value.
 Unlike in representative democracy, it is not a model based on a majority
 imposing its will on a minority.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Despite the fact that Peer to Peer reverses a number of value hierarchies
 introduced by the Enlightenment, in particular the epistemologies and ontologie
s of modernity, it is a continuation and partial realization of the emancipatory
 project.
 It is in the definition of Wallerstein, an eminently democratic project.
 Peer to peer partly reflects postmodernity, and partly transcends it.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4.3.
 Evolutionary Conceptions of Power and Hierarchy
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Japanese scholar Shumpei Kumon has given the following evolutionary account
 of power.
 In premodernity, he says, power is derived from military force.
 The strong conquer the weak and exact tribute, part of the produce of the
 land, labor (the corvee system).
 Rome was rich because it was strong.
 In modernity, military force eventually looses its primary place and monetary
 power takes over.
 Or in other words, the U.S.
 is strong because it is rich.
 It's productive capacity is more important than its military might, the
 latter derives from the former.
 It is commercial and financial power that are the main criterion of strength
 and success.
 In late modernity, a new form of power is born, through the power of the
 mass media.
 The U.S.
 lost the war, not because the Vietnamese were stronger militarily, or had
 more financial clout, but because the U.S.
 lost the war for the hearts and minds, and lost social support for the
 war effort.
 With the emergence of the internet and peer to peer processes, yet a new
 form of power emerges, and Kumon calls it the Wisdom Game .
 In order to have influence, one must give quality knowledge away, and thus
 build reputation, through the demonstration of one’s ‘Wisdom’.
 The more one shares, the more this material is used by others, the higher
 one’s reputation, the bigger one’s influence.
 This process is true for individuals within groups, and for the process
 among groups, thus creating a hierarchy of influence amongst networks.
 But as I have argued, in a true P2P environment, this process is flexible
 and reversible to a much larger extent than in the previous systems.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
According to the French philosopher and historian Michel Foucault, premodern
 systems, including the early modern classical era of the 18th century,
 are characterized by the motto ‘make die or let live’: the sovereign has
 the power of life and death, but does not greatly interfere in the life
 of his subjects, which is ruled by custom and the divine precepts of the
 spiritual power.
 In modernity, Foucault sees two new forms of power arising: disciplinary
 power and biopower.
 Disciplinary power starts from the point of view that society consists
 of autonomous individuals, which are in need of socialization and ‘discipline’,
 so that they can be integrated in the normative framework of capitalist
 society.
 Biopower is the start of the total management of life, from birth to death,
 of the great mass of the people.
 The new motto is therefore, said Foucault: ‘make live, let die’.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
His contemporary Gilles Deleuze noted a change though.
 In mass-media dominated postmodern society, which became dominant after
 1968, disciplinary institutions enter in crisis.
 What is used is the internalization of social requirements through the
 use of the mass media, advertising and PR, with control mechanisms in place,
 which focus on making sure the right results are attained.
 The individual is now himself in charge of making it happen.
 Power has become more democratic, more social, more immanent to the social
 field, "distributed throughout the brains and bodies of the citizens" (Negri's
 Empire, p.
 23).
 Philippe Zafirian, in his essay Temps et Modernite, further re-interprets
 the work of Deleuze by applying it to the workplace and calls the new power,
 the power of modulation, 'control by modulation' .
 Instead of tightly describing and dividing jobs, and controlling their
 debit, as was the case in the 'modern' factory system and in particular
 in the Fordist/Taylorist period, the focus is now on 'objectives' and 'deadline
s'.
 Both the manager and the work are constantly evaluating and self-evaluating
 their ability to conform to the high-pressure objectives and deadlines,
 but are 'free' in how to attain it.
 Zafirian uses the metaphor of the 'elastic' : you can pull it in different
 directions, within it you are free to go about, but there are indeed limits
 that cannot be crossed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In any case, Deleuze already prefigured, so many years ahead, the emerging
 dominance of distributed networks (rhizomes).
 If Foucault was the philosopher and historian of power of modernity, then
 Deleuze and Guattari can be considered to be the early theorizers of power
 in the network era.
 However there is a danger in missing important developments, radical innovation
s even, if we conflate the post-1968 under the one heading of postmodernity,
 since that would miss the accelerated growth of peer to peer processes,
 which started only in the 1990's, after the popularization of the internet.
 Perhaps future historians will date a new era that began in 1989, with
 the fall of the Berlin Wall indicating the moment when the free flow of
 information began to destroy the most authoritarian regimes.
 In the figures below, I explicitly distinguish the postmodern era, from
 the emerging peer to peer era.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The P2P era indeed adds a new twist, a new form of power, which we have
 called Protocollary Power, and has first been clearly identified and analyzed
 by Alexander Galloway in his book Protocol.
 We have already given some examples.
 One is the fact that the blogosphere has devised mechanisms to avoid the
 emergence of individual and collective monopolies, through rules that are
 incorporated in the software itself.
 Another was whether the entertainment industry would succeed in incorporating
 software or hardware-based restrictions to enforce their version of copyright.
 There are many other similarly important evolutions to monitor: Will the
 internet remain a point to point structure? Will the web evolve to a true
 P2P medium through Writeable Web developments? The common point is this:
 social values are incorporated, integrated in the very architecture of
 our technical systems, either in the software code or the hardwired machinery,
 and these then enable/allow or prohibit/discourage certain usages, thereby
 becoming a determinant factor in the type of social relations that are
 possible.
 Are the algorhythms that determine search results objective, or manipulated
 for commercial and ideological reasons? Is parental control software driven
 by censorship rules that serve a fundamentalist agenda? Many issues are
 dependent on hidden protocols, which the user community has to learn to
 see (as a new form of media literacy and democratic practice), so that
 it can become an object of conscious development, favoring peer to peer
 processes, rather than the restrictive and manipulative command and control
 systems.
 In P2P systems, the formal rules governing bureaucratic systems are replaced
 by the design criteria of our new means of production, and this is where
 we should focus our attention.
 Galloway suggests that we make a diagram of the networks we participate
 in, with dots and lines, nodes and edges.
 Important questions then become: Who decides who can participate?, or better,
 what are the implied rules governing participation? (since there is no
 specific 'who' or command in a distributed environment); what kind of linkages
 are possible? On the example of the internet, Galloway shows how the net
 has a peer to peer protocol in the form of TCP/IP, but that the Domain
 Name System is hierarchical, and that an authorative server could block
 a domain family from operating.
 This is how power should be analyzed.
 Such power is not per se negative, since protocol is needed to enable participa
tion (no driving without highway code!), but protocol can also be centralized,
 proprietary, secret, in that case subverting peer to peer processes.
 However, the stress on protocol, which concerns what Yochai Benkler calls
 the 'logical layer' of the networks, should not make us forget the power
 distribution of the physical layer (who owns the networks), and the content
 layer (who owns and controls the content).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The key question is: do the centralized and hierarchical elements in the
 protocol, enable or disable participation? This is shown in the following
 account of the development of the theory and practice of hierarchy, submitted
 to us by John Heron in a personal communication.
 In true peer to peer, the role of hierarchy is to enable the spontaneous
 emergence of 'autonomy in cooperation':
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

There seem to be at least four degrees of cultural development, rooted in
 degrees of moral insight:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
autocratic cultures which define rights in a limited and oppressive way
 and there are no rights of political participation;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
narrow democratic cultures which practice political participation through
 representation, but have no or very limited participation of people in
 decision-making in all other realms, such as research, religion, education,
 industry etc.;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
wider democratic cultures which practice both political participation and
 varying degree of wider kinds of participation;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
commons p2p cultures in a libertarian and abundance-oriented global network
 with equipotential rights of participation of everyone in every field of
 human endeavor.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Heron adds that "These four degrees could be stated in terms of the relations
 between hierarchy, co-operation and autonomy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Hierarchy defines, controls and constrains co-operation and autonomy;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Hierarchy empowers a measure of co-operation and autonomy in the political
 sphere only;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Hierarchy empowers a measure of co-operation and autonomy in the political
 sphere and in varying degrees in other spheres;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The sole role of hierarchy is in its spontaneous emergence in the initiation
 and continuous flowering of autonomy-in-co-operation in all spheres of
 human endeavor
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
From all of the above, we can conclude that hierarchy does not disappear
 in peer to peer processes, but that it changes its nature.
 Hierarchy, or authority ranking as it is called by Alan Fiske, takes on
 new forms such as peer governance, servant leadership, multistakeholdership.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here is how Joseph Rost defines leadership in the new collaborative era:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
“The first is that the activities be influential, that is, noncoercive.
 The second is that the activities be done by people in a relationship.
 The third is that the activities involve a real significant change.
 And the fourth element is that the activities reflect the purposes of the
 people in the relationship, not just a single person.
 All of these standards insure collaboration rather than the notion that
 leadership is a great leader doing great things ."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Similarly, another author on leadership, Jeffrey S.
 Nielsen distinguishes ‘rank thinking’, from ‘peer thinking’:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"I define rank thinking as the belief that only a few in any organization
 should be given special privilege to monopolize information, control decision-m
aking, and command obedience from the vast majority either through coercive
 or manipulative power.
 Peer thinking, on the other hand, is the belief that everyone in the organizati
on should have equal standing to share in information, participate in the
 decision-making process, and choose to follow through persuasive means.
 Peer thinking assumes that we each have equal privilege to speak and an
 obligation to listen.
 Peer-based organizations create a space--an arena--where we come to recognize
 and respect one another as equal participants in organizational life ."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
5.
 "Network Theory" or: The Discovery of P2P principles in the Cosmic Sphere
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
5.1.A.
 Distributed networks and 'Small World' theory
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Note the difference in the above section title.
 Here we are not speaking of emergence, but rather the recognition or discovery
 of principles within the natural world, which obey P2P principles.
 They were always-already there, but we have only recently learned to see
 them.
 Technology reflects, to a certain extent, humanity’s growing knowledge
 of the natural world.
 Technological artifacts and processes integrate and embed in their protocols,
 this growing knowledge.
 And lately, we have learned to see the natural (physical, biological, cognitive
) world quite differently from before.
 No longer as mechanisms or hierarchies, but as networks.
 Thus, the fact that engineers, software architects, and social network
 managers are devising and implementing more and more P2P systems also reflects
 this new understanding.
 Studies of distributed intelligence in physical systems, of the swarming
 behavior of social insects, of the ‘wisdom of crowds’, as well as of collective
 intelligence in the human field, show that in many situations participative
 distributed system functions more efficiently than command and control
 systems which create bottlenecks.
 In natural systems, true centralized and hierarchic command and control
 systems seem rather rare.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Though there can be said to exist hierarchies in nature, such as a succession
 of progressively more enfolding systems, and many pyramidal systems of
 command and control in human society, the former are better called 'holarchies'
, as actual command and control systems are actually quite rare.
 More common is the existing of multiple agents, which through their interaction
, create emergent coherent orders and behavior.
 The brain for example, has been shown to be a rather egalitarian network
 of neurons, and there is no evidence of a command center .
 And there are of course multiple scientific fields where this is now shown
 to be the case.
 Network theory is therefore focused on the interrelationships of equipotent,
 and distributed agents, and how complex systems arise from them.
 Network theory is a form of systemic reductionism, which focuses on the
 interaction of agents, without looking much at their 'personal' characteristics
, but is remarkably successful in explaining the behavior of many systems.
 Thus, if historians are starting to look at the world in terms of flows,
 social science in general is increasingly looking at its objects of study
 in terms of social network analysis .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important contribution is the work of Alexander R.
 Galloway, Protocol, because he clearly makes the important distinction
 between 'decentralized' and 'distributed' networks.
 First we had centralized networks.
 In this format, all links between nodes must go through the center, which
 has to authorize or enable them.
 Think about mainframe computers with dumb terminals, or the central switches
 in telephone systems.
 In a second phase, networks are decentralized, which means the center is
 broken up in several subcenters.
 Here, linkages and actions between nodes must still pass through one of
 these subcenters.
 An example is the American airport system, organized around hubs such as
 Atlanta.
 To go from one regional city to another, you must pass through such a hub.
 In distributed networks, such as the network of interstate highways or
 the internet, this requirement no longer applies.
 Hubs, i.e.
 nodes that carry more links than others, may exist, but they are optional,
 and grow organically, they are not obligatory or designed beforehand.
 Abstract network theory, seeing hubs in both cases, may miss this important
 point.
 Peer to peer is the relational dynamic of distributed networks! A distributed
 network may or may not be a egalitarian network (see just below).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Nexus is a book by Mark Buchanan, who summarizes network theory investigations
 for the lay public, focusing on small world networks.
 These differ from totally random networks, where it takes many steps to
 go from one node to another, and are characterized by a relative 'low degree
 of separation'.
 Typically, human society is determined by no more than six degrees of separatio
n: it never takes more intermediaries to contact any other person on the
 planet.
 Such networks come in two varieties: 1) aristocratic networks, where it
 is larger hubs and connectors who are responsible for linking the network
 together as a whole; and egalitarian networks, where the nodes have largely
 a same number of links, but while the majority has strong links to a few
 surrounding links with whom they interact a lot, a minority has weak ties
 with faraway nodes, and it is they who are responsible for holding the
 network together, and rapidly moving information from one local or affinity
 group, to another different one.
 Each forms has its strength and weaknesses: aristocratic networks are very
 strong in resisting random attacks, but vulnerable when their connectors
 are attacked, while egalitarian networks are more vulnerable to random
 disruption.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
5.1.B.
 Equipotentiality vs.
 the Power Law
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the most interesting findings of social network analysis is the existence
 of a power law.
 A power law says that for any x increase in the number of links per node
 (or specific characteristic per node, such as acreage per square kilometer
 for a river basin), the number of nodes having that characteristic will
 decline by a fixed factor.
 In economics this gives us the famous Pareto principle, i.e.
 20% of the people having 80% of the wealth.
 Or 20% of the books in a bookstore generating 80% of the sales or profits.
 But the power law is nearly everywhere, suggesting a natural form of concentrat
ion and even monopolization as almost inevitable.
 In fact, it seems that whenever we have many choices and many distributed
 agents making these choices, inequality of choice is created .
 It seems to be the natural result of any 'economy of attention'.
 But that is the point, such distribution is not forced, as in a oligopoly
 or monopoly, but arises naturally from the freedom of choice, and can be
 considered a 'fair' result, provided no coercion is used.
 Networks where such a power law operates are called 'scale-free', because
 at whatever scale, the same relation between variables (i.e.
 distribution pattern) applies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In terms of a normative P2P ethos, it is important to note that it should
 not necessarily and systematically favor egalitarian networks.
 The Internet and the web are both aristocratic networks; the blogosphere
 is characterized by a power law distribution.
 The key questions are: 1) is the network efficient; 2) does it enable participa
tion; 3) is the emergence of an aristocratic structure non-coercive and
 eventually reversible.
 Focusing on this reversibility is probably one of the tasks of peer governance.
 Granted that a power law may be in operation, that does not mean we must
 acquiesce in social processes that re-inforce such inequalities, but rather,
 that we then look for human and technical/algorhythmic solutions that renders
 the structure fluid enough so that it may be reversed if need be.
 But in many cases, we have to admit that some form of centralization, is
 necessary and efficient.
 We all prefer one standard for our operating systems for example.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The power law can possibly mitigated by the development of algorhythms,
 that can highlight important information and connections from nodes that
 may not come up 'naturally', but this discipline, though still in its infancy
 at the moment, is making rapid strides and is the core competence of new
 internet companies like Google, Technorati and others.
 But the power law is also counteracted by what some network economists
 have called the 'Long Tail'.
 This is the phenomena whereby minority groups are not excluded from the
 distribution of knowledge and exchange, and markets, but are on the contrary
 enable to organize micro-communities.
 In the market for cultural products, this has the effect of radically enhancing
 the supply and demand for products.
 Instead of the 80/20 distribution of products, i.e.
 20% of the products being responsible for 80% of the sales and profits,
 we get something more akin to a 50/50 distribution.
 Online stores like Amazon and eBay are instrumentalising the phenomenon
 by using affinity matching schemes, which have resulted in the creation
 of many thousands of previously not existing mini-markets.
 Books, CD's and films which would be destroyed for lack of interest in
 the mass media system, now have a second and third and perhaps infinitely
 extendable lease of life, through the continued attention given to them
 by self-organizing minority interests, which can perpetuate across generations.
 This is an important guarantee for a vibrant cultural life, which does
 not destroy difference and cultural heterogeneity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the keys to avoiding the power law may therefore be to keep sub-networks
 small.
 One of the recurring debates within cooperation studies indeed concerns
 a discussion on the optimal size of online groups.
 Dunbar, an anthropologist at the University College of London, has posited
 a link between brain size and our maximum number of close social ties ,
 a claim supported by many animal, especially primate, and anthropological
 studies.
 He predicts that 147.8 is the "mean group size" for humans and this number
 has also been applied to online cooperation.
 But such a number would require a large time of social grooming so in reality
 it is much less.
 This discussion is important because other researchers, such as Valerie
 Krebs, have shown that in smaller groups, the power law does not operate
 and that they function as egalitarian networks .
 The key therefore is to organize online collaboration in such a way so
 that it is divided in appropriate subgroups, and this seems pretty much
 the way software peer production teams seem to operate.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There will be a lot to learn from this emergent field of cooperation studies
 , as it weanes us from wishful thinking into a more systematic understanding
 of what it takes to make cooperative projects work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the most important works have been those of Axelrod, in his Evolution
 of Cooperation (Axelrod, 1984).
 He reconceived Game Theory, which had originally been seen as undermining
 altruism, by grounding the experiments in the real conditions of social
 life, instead of abstracting it in unrealistic laboratory or thought experiment
s.
 Game theory is important because it models human intentionality as it wavers
 between altruistic and selfish strategies.
 His study of the classic Prisoner's Dilemma has yielded three important
 rules for cooperation to occur : 1) communities must promote ongoing interactio
n; 2) individuals must be able to identify each other; 3) individuals must
 have information about the past behaviour of others.
 Many of these insights have been incorporated in the social software tools
 being developed, and are the reason of the success of reputation systems
 such as exists in eBay etc… According to the findings of Howard Rheingold
 and his cooperation studies group, the Prisoner's Dilemma game, which undermine
s cooperation and operates in an information-poor environment, may well
 be superseded by new forms of the Assurance Game .
 A Prisoner's Game will operate when no information about the partner is
 available, as distrust will prevail, but the social accounting technologies
 generate information about the trustworthy of a potential partner, and
 in such an environment, the Assurance Game will prevail.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another important milestone in cooperation studies did not focus on interperson
 interaction (as does Game Theory) but on group behaviour in real physical
 communities involved in the use and management of communal resources.
 It can be found in Eleanor Ostrom's Governing the Commons (Ostrom, 1990).
 Amongst the principles applied in successful communities are: 1) boundaries
 must be clearly defined so that there is a clear sense of who may use collectiv
e resources; 2) the rules of usage must match local conditions; 3) affected
 individuals must be able to participate in the adaptation of these rules;
 4) control mechanisms of user behaviour must exist, as well as a system
 of graduated sanctions.
 Her survey concluded that this was done better through self-regulation
 than through external authorities; 5) finally, the community must have
 access to low-cost conflict resolution mechanisms.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It must be stressed however that her study about physical Commons dealing
 with scarce rival goods, cannot be applied without adaptation to the digital
 commons dealing witn non-rival goods, where a Tragedy of the Commons, i.e.
 an abuse of these scarce goods for personal gain, cannot occur, though
 some of her conclusions on group behaviour and its regulation do apply.
 But the totality of her conclusions are certainly of interest to defenders
 of our very important physical Commons and show that well regulated Commons
 have found ways to deal with abuse and overuse.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The shift in 'business models' characteristics of the new networks is explained
 by David Reed, who has summarized the different mathematical laws inherent
 in the value created by networks.
 First, we focus on the individuals.
 If a network has N-members and memberships grows, then one can see a linear
 growth in audience, i.e.
 N+1, N+2, etc..
 i.e.
 a proportional growth in value.
 This formula was already at play in broadcast media and in such an environment,
 'content is king', and publishers vie for the attention of the users of
 the network.
 This explains the role of portal sites such as Yahoo, who re-intermediate
 the economy of attention that we discussed before.
 If we now focus on the 'interaction between individuals', we see that the
 network enables transactions, but that these grow by a 'square value'.
 This characteristic is called Metcalfe's Law.
 A network of 2 allows for 2 transactions (back and forth buying and selling),
 a network of 3 allows for 8 transactions, a network of 4 allows for 16
 transactions.
 This aspect of the network creates transactional platforms such as eBay.
 Finally, we focus on community.
 Networks have the ability to enable the formation of subgroups, they are
 'Group Forming Networks'.
 But value growth here is 'exponential'.
 It is this characteristic that is called Reed's Law .
 Every affinity group creates and 'consumes' its own content, and it is
 here that the true peer to peer processes emerge, characterized by infinite
 content creation .
 The economy of attention becomes moot, because what is happening is not
 limited content competing for the same audience, but infinite content competing
 for infinite combinations of affinity groups.
 You are then creating content, not for an audience, but as a means of creating
 interconnectedness between a group of people sharing an interest or common
 goal.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To conclude: the discovery of the theory of networks in the physical sphere,
 has therefore a corollary in seeing it in social life, and in particular,
 in the area of organizational life, including business.
 The finds its expression in the emerging discipline of social network analysis
 and cooperation studies generally, and also the business process applied
 "coordination theory", as pioneered by Thomas Malone .
 All these studies are important because they act as a corrective to misplaced
 idealism and provide lessons from scientific studies and objective experience
 with true cooperation.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
6.
 P2P in the Sphere of Culture and Self
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
6.1.A.
 A new articulation between the individual and the collective
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the key insights of psychologist Clare Graves’ interpretation of
 human cultural evolution, is the idea of the changing balance, over time,
 between the two poles of the individual and the collective.
 In the popularization of his research by the Spiral Dynamics systems, they
 see the tribal era as characterized by collective harmony, but also as
 a culture of stagnation.
 Out of this harmony, strong individuals are born, heroes and conquerors,
 which will their people and others into the creation of larger entities.
 These leaders are considered divinities themselves and thus in certain
 senses are ‘beyond the law’, which they have themselves constituted through
 their conquest.
 It is against this ‘divine individualism’ that a religious reaction is
 born, very evident in the monotheistic religions, which stresses the existence
 of a transcendent divine order (rather than the immanent order of paganism),
 to which even the sovereign must obey.
 Thus a more communal/collective order is created.
 But again, this situation is overturned when a new individual ethos arises,
 which will be reflected in the growth of capitalism.
 It is based on individuals, and collective individuals, which think strategical
ly in terms of their own interest.
 In the words of anthropologist Louis Dumont, we moved from a situation
 of wholism, in which the empirical individuals saw themselves foremost
 as part of a whole, towards individualism as an ideology , positing atomistic
 individuals, in need of socialization.
 They transferred their powers to collective individuals, such as the king,
 the people, the nation, which could act in their name, and created a sacrificia
l unity through the institutions of modernity.
 (In section 3.3.C.
 , I have tried to show how peer to peer tries to avoid the creation of
 collective individuals, through the creation of objective algorhythms which
 express the communal wisdom of a collective.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This articulation, based on a autonomous self in a society which he himself
 creates through the social contract, has been changing in postmodernity.
 Simondon, a French philosopher of technology with an important posthumous
 following in the French-speaking world, has argued that what was typical
 for modernity was to 'extract the individual dimension' of every aspect
 of reality, of things/processes that are also always-already related .
 And what is needed to renew thought, he argued, was not to go back to premodern
 wholism, but to systematically build on the proposition that 'everything
 is related', while retaining the achievements of modern thought, i.e.
 the equally important centrality of individuality.
 Thus individuality then comes to be seen as constituted by relations ,
 from relations.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This proposition, that the individual is now seen as always-already part
 of various social fields, as a singular composite being, no longer in need
 of socialization, but rather in need of individuation, seems to be one
 of the main achievements of what could be called 'postmodern thought'.
 Atomistic individualism is rejected in favor of the view of a relational
 self , a new balance between individual agency and collective communion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In my opinion, as a necessary complement and advance to postmodern thought,
 it is necessary to take a third step, i.e.
 not to be content with both a recognition of individuality, and its foundation
 in relationality, but to also recognize the level of the collective, i.e.
 the field in which the relationships occur.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If we only see relationships, we forget about the whole, which is society
 itself (and its sub-fields).
 Society is more than just the sum of its "relationship parts".
 Society sets up a 'protocol', in which these relationships can occur, it
 forms the agents in their subjectivity, and consists of norms which enable
 or disable certain type of relationships.
 Thus we have agents, relationships, and fields.
 Finally, if we want to integrate the subjective element of human intentionality
, it is necessary to introduce a fourth element: the object of the sociality.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Indeed, human agents never just 'relate' in the abstract, agents always
 relate around an object, in a concrete fashion.
 Swarming insects do not seem to have such an object, they just follow instructi
ons and signals, without a view of the whole, but mammals do.
 For example, bands of wolves congregate around the object of the prey.
 It is the object that energizes the relationships, that mobilizes the action.
 Humans can have more abstract objects, that are located in a temporal future,
 as an object of desire.
 We perform the object in our minds, and activate ourselves to realize them
 individually or collectively.
 P2P projects organize themselves around such common project, and my own
 Peer to Peer theory is an attempt to create an object that can inspire
 social and political change.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In summary, for a comprehensive view of the collective, it is now customary
 to distinguish 1) the totality of relations; 2) the field in which these
 relations operate, up to the macro-field of society itself, which establishes
 the 'protocol' of what is possible and not; 3) the object of the relationship
 ("object-oriented sociality"), i.e.
 the pre-formed ideal which inspires the common action.
 That sociality is 'object-oriented' is an important antidote to any 'flatland',
 i.e.
 'merely objective' network theory, on which many failed social networking
 experiments are based.
 This idea that the field of relations is the only important dimension of
 reality, while forgetting human intentionality .
 What we need is a subjective-objective approach to networks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In conclusion, this turn to the collective that the emergence of peer to
 peer represent does not in any way present a loss of individuality, even
 of individualism.
 Rather it 'transcends and includes' individualism and collectivism in a
 new unity, which I would like to call 'cooperative individualism'.
 The cooperativity is not necessarily intentional (i.e.
 the result of conscious altruism), but constitutive of our being, and the
 best applications of P2P, are based on this idea.
 Similar to Adam Smith's theory of the invisible hand, the best designed
 collaborative systems take advantage of the self-interest of the users,
 turning it into collective benefit.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This recognition would help in distinguishing transformative P2P conceptions
 from regressive interpretations harking back to premodern communion.
 I find this distinction well expressed by Charlene Spretnak, cited by John
 Heron in a debate with the conception of an 'inclusional self' by Ted Lumley
 of Goodshare.org:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"The ecological/cosmological sense of uniqueness coupled with intersubjectivity
 and interbeing…One can accurately speak of the ‘autonomy’ of an individual
 only by incorporating a sense of the dynamic web of relationships that
 are constitutive for that being at a given moment."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In any case, the balance is again moving towards the collective.
 But if the new forms of collective recognize individuality and even individuali
sm, they are not merely individualist in nature, meaning: they are not collectiv
e individuals, rather, the new collective expresses itself in the creation
 of the common.
 The collective is no longer the local ‘wholistic’ and ‘oppressive’ community,
 and it is no longer the contractually based society with its institutions,
 now also seen as oppressive.
 The new commons is not a unified and transcendent collective individual,
 but a collection of large number of singular projects, constituting a multitude
 .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This whole change in ontology and epistemology, in ways of feeling and being,
 in ways of knowing and apprehending the world, has been prefigured amongst
 social scientists and philosophers, including the hard sciences such as
 physics and biology .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important change has been the overthrow of the Cartesian subject-object
 split.
 No longer is the ‘individual self’ looking at the world as an object.
 Since postmodernity has established that the individual is composed and
 traversed by numerous social fields (of power, of the unconscious, class
 relations, gender, etc…), and since he/she has become aware of this, the
 subject is now seen (after his death as an ‘essence’ and a historical construct
 had been announced by Foucault), as a perpetual process of becoming (“subjectiv
ation").
 His knowing is now subjective-objective and truth-building has been transformed
 from objective and mono-perspectival to multiperspectival.
 This individual operates not in a dead space of objects, but in a network
 of flows.
 Space is dynamical, perpetually co-created by the actions of the individuals
 and in peer to peer processes, where the digital noosphere is an extraordinary
 medium for generating signals emanating from this dynamical space.
 The individuals in peer groups, which are thus not ‘transcendent’ collective
 individuals, are in a constant adaptive behavior.
 Thus peer to peer is global from the start, it is incorporated in its practice.
 It is an expression not of globalization, the worldwide system of domination,
 but of globality, the growing interconnected of human relationships.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Peer to peer is to be regarded as a new form of social exchange, creating
 its equivalent form of subjectivation, and itself reflecting the new forms
 of subjectivation.
 P2P, interpreted here as a positive and normative ethos that is implicit
 in the logic of its practice, though it rejects the ideology of individualism,
 does not in any way endanger the achievements of the modern individual,
 in terms of the desire and achievement of personal autonomy, authenticity,
 etc….
 It is no transcendent power that demands sacrifice of self: in Negrian
 terms, it is fully immanent, participants are not given anything up, and
 unlike the contractual vision, which is fictitious in any case, the participati
on is entirely voluntary.
 Thus what it reflects is an expansion of ethics: the desire to create and
 share, to produce something useful.
 The individual who joins a P2P project, puts his being, unadulterated,
 in the service of the construction of a common resource.
 Implicit is not just a concern for the narrow group, not just intersubjective
 relations, but the whole social field surrounding it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important aspect is the issue of value, both the value in the sense of
 what is exchanged on a market, and the value in the sense of ethical meaningful
ness, i.e.
 what we value.
 Peer to peer produces for use value, not exchange value.
 The wider community therefore derives 'use value' from this common form
 of production.
 Participants themselves derive value in two different ways: first, the
 uptake or not of the 'production' is a sign of the relative value of the
 product in its wider field of related offerings.
 Participants will partake in the general recognition/valuation of the project
 in the wider society.
 Second, within, a similar form of recognition will operate according to
 the contribution of participants.
 The process is often measured or aided by social accounting tools specifically
 designed to that effect, and individual recognition of effort is always
 a key element of open source projects.
 Peer to peer is therefore also a process of social recognition and valuation,
 that replaces or complements money as a token of social recognition.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How does a successful P2P project operate, in terms of reconciling the individua
l and the collective?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Imagine a successful meeting of minds: individual ideas are confronted,
 but also changed in the process, through the free association born of the
 encounter with other intelligences.
 Thus eventually a common idea emerges, that has integrated the differences,
 not subsumed them.
 The participants do not feel they have made concessions or compromises,
 but feel that the new common integration is based on their ideas.
 There has been no minority, which has succumbed to the majority.
 There has been no ‘representation’, or loss of difference.
 Such is the true process of peer to peer.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important philosophical change has been the abandonment of the unifying
 universalism of the Enlightenment project.
 Universality was to be attained by striving to unity, by the transcendence
 of representation of political power.
 But this unity meant sacrifice of difference.
 Today, the new epistemological and ontological requirement that P2P reflects,
 is not abstract universalism, but the concrete universality of a commons
 which has not sacrificed difference.
 This is the truth that the new concept of multitude, developed by Toni
 Negri and inspired by Spinoza, expresses.
 P2P is not predicated on representation and unity, but of the full expression
 of difference.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
6.1.B.
 Towards ‘contributory’ dialogues of civilizations and religions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the more global expressions of the peer to peer ethic, is the equipotency
 it creates between civilizations and religions.
 These have to be seen as unique responses, temporally and spatially defined,
 of specific sections of humanity, but directed towards similar challenges.
 Thus we arrive at the concept of ‘contributory worldviews’ or ‘contributory
 theologies’.
 Humanity as a whole, or more precisely, its individual members, have now
 access to the whole of human civilization as a common resource.
 Individuals, now being considered ‘composites’ made up of various influences,
 belongings and identities, in constant becoming, are embarked in a meaning-maki
ng process that is coupled to an expansion of awareness to the well-being
 of the planet as a whole, and of its concrete community of inhabitants.
 In order to become more cosmopolitan they will encounter the various answers
 given by other civilizations, but since they cannot fully comprehend a
 totally different historical experience, this is mediated through dialogue.
 And thus a process of global dialogue is created, not a synthesis or world
 religion, but a mosaic of millions of personal integrations that grows
 out of multiple dialogues.
 Rather than the concept of multiculturalism, which implies fixed social
 and cultural identities, peer to peer suggests cultural and spiritual hybridity
, and which no two members of a community have the same composite understanding
 and way of thinking.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the recent examples that came to my attention are the annual SEED
 conferences in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
 They bring together, native elders, quantum physicists, philosophers, and
 linguists, none of them assuming superiority over one another, but collectively
 ‘building truth’ through their encounter.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
P2P dialogues are not representative dialogues, in which the participants
 represent their various religions, rather, they are encounters of composite
 and hybrid experiences, in which each full expresses his different understandin
g, building a spiritual commons.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
6.1.C.
 Participative Spirituality and the Critique of Spiritual Authoritarianism
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Traditional mystical and religious paths are exclusionary, based on strong
 divisions between the in and the out group.
 Internally, they reflect the social values and organizational models of
 the civilizations in which they were born.
 Thus they are premodern in authoritarian manner, patriarchal, sexist, subsuming
 the individual to the whole.
 Or, in their latter manifestations they are run as corporations and bureaucraci
es, reflecting the early emergence of capitalism as in the case of Protestantism
, and in the case of the “new age", operating explicitly as a spiritual
 marketplace reflecting the capitalist monetary ethos, where every spiritual
 experience can be bought, for the price of attending a workshop or a seminar.
 When traditional religions of the East move to the West, they bring with
 them their authoritarian and feudal formats and mentalities.
 Epistemologically, in their spiritual methodologies, they are authoritarian
 as well, far from an open process, traditional paths start from the idea
 that there is one world, one truth, one divine order, and that some privileged
 individuals, saints, bishops, sages, gurus, have been privileged to know
 this truth, and that this can be taught to followers.
 The seventies and eighties have been characterized by the emergence of
 new religions and cults with a particularly authoritarian character, and
 by the appearance of a number of fallen gurus , characterized by abuses
 in terms of finance, sexuality, and power.
 If one decides to follow an experiential path, it is always the case that
 the experience is only validated if it follows the pregiven doctrine of
 the group in question.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is clear that such a situation, such a spiritual offering is antithetical
 to the P2P ethos.
 Thus, in the emergence of a new participatory spirituality, two moments
 can be recognized, a critical one, focused on the critique of spiritual
 authoritarianism, and with books like those of June Campbell, J.
 Kripal, the Trimondi’s, the Kramer’s, and many others who have been advocating
 reform within the Churches and spiritual movements, and the more constructive
 approaches which aim to construct a new approach to spiritual inquiry altogethe
r, those that explicitly integrate P2P practices in their mode of spiritual
 inquiry.
 The two pioneering authors who discuss ‘participative spirituality’ are
 Jorge Ferrer and John Heron.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Heron has given a good summary of the post-WWII evolution of spiritual culture
 and describes the current moment as follows:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
(a) The erosion of guru status as a result of sexual and financial abuse
 and bullying scandals among both Eastern and homegrown Western gurus and
 spiritual teachers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
(b) The erosion of 'enlightenment' claims by the proliferation of the number
 of people, especially in the West, making the claim: the more people who
 make the claim, the more its narcissistic inflation stands revealed.
 For the 'enlightenment' claim is also an authority-claim to have followers,
 a recruiting drive; and the more claims that are made, the stronger the
 competition among claimants in the market-place for attention.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
(c) A growing awareness that spiritual authority is within and that to project
 it outward onto teacher, tradition or text is an early, adolescent phase
 of spiritual development in the one projecting, and counter-spiritual manipulat
ive abuse in any guru/teacher who seeks to elicit, to appropriate and to
 sustain the projection.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
(d) The emergence of peer to peer spirituality, which democratizes charismatic,
 enlightened leadership, and realizes that it is a role which different
 persons assume at different times, either in the initiation of a peer group
 or in the continuous unfolding of its process.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ferrer’s book, Revisioning Transpersonal Psychology: Towards a Participatory
 Vision of Human Spirituality, not only is a strong critique of spiritual
 authoritarianism, which integrates poststructuralist arguments against
 absolute knowledge claims, but also a first description of an alternative
 view .
 In it, a spiritual practice operates as an open process in which spiritual
 knowledge is co-created, and thus cannot fully rely on old ‘maps’, which
 have to be considered as testimonies of earlier creations, not as absolute
 truths.
 Spirituality is understood in terms of the present relationship with the
 Cosmos (the concrete Totality), accessible to everyone here and now .
 Instead of the perennialist vision of many paths leading to the same truth,
 Ferrer advocates for an ‘ocean of emancipation’ with the many moving shores
 representing the different and ever-evolving approaches to spiritual co-creatio
n.
 In an article on ‘Integral Transformative Practices’ , Ferrer also records
 new practices that reflect this participatory turn, such as the ones pioneered
 by Albareda and Romero in Spain: open processes of self- and group discovery
 that are no longer cognicentric, but instead fully integral approaches
 that collaborative engage the instinctual, emotional, mental, and transmental
 domains as equal partners in the unfolding of spiritual life.
 J.
 Kripal, who is very appreciative of Jorge Ferrer's contribution, does conclude
 that one more lingering illusion about religion and mysticism should be
 abandoned: that it is somehow quintessentially 'moral' or 'ethical' and
 essentially emancipatory in character, a claim that he disputes .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
New Zealand-based John Heron expounds, in the book “Sacred Science", the
 specific peer to peer practice that he has created, called Cooperative
 Inquiry.
 In such a process, individuals agree on a methodology of inquiry, then
 compare their experiences, adapting their inquiry to their findings, etc…
 thus creating a collective intelligence, which is totally open and periodically
 renewed, experimenting both with the ‘transcendent’ practices of eastern
 nondual religions (transmental ‘witnessing’) as well as with the immanent
 grounding methods of the nature religions, thus creating a innovative dipolar
 approach which does not reject any practice, but attempts to integrate
 them.
 Peer circles (check the concept in a web search engine) have sprung up
 worldwide.
 Remi Sussan stresses that the chaos magick groups on the internet, explicitly
 see themselves as self-created religions adopting open peer-based processes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
John Heron, in a personal communication, has outlined which conditions a
 contemporary spiritual practice based on interdependent relationality,
 should uphold, with explicite P2P characteristics:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On this overall view, spirituality is located in the interpersonal heart
 of the human condition where people co-operate to explore meaning, build
 relationship and manifest creativity through collaborative action inquiry
 into multi-line integration and consummation.
 Such collegial applied spirituality has at least eight distinguishing character
istics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
It is developmentally holistic, involving diverse major lines of human developme
nt; and the holism is both within each line and as between the lines.
 Prime value is put on relational lines, such as gender, psychosexuality,
 emotional and interpersonal skills, communicative competence, peer communion,
 morality, human ecology, supported by the individualistic, such as contemplativ
e competence, physical fitness.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
It is psychosomatically holistic, embracing a fully embodied and vitalized
 way of being.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
It is epistemologically holistic, embracing many ways of knowing: knowing
 by presence with, by intuiting significant form and process, by conceptualizing
, by practising.
 Such holistic knowing is intrinsically dialogic, action- and inquiry-oriented.
 It is fulfilled in peer-to-peer participative inquiry, and the participation
 is both epistemic and political.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
It is ontologically holistic, open to the manifest (nature, culture and
 the subtle), to immanent life and transcendent mind.
 To relate (4) back to (3), there can be experiential knowing by presence
 with the manifest, the immanent and the transcendent, either relatively
 independently of each other or in full integration.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
It is focussed on worthwhile practical purposes that promote a flourishing
 humanity-cum-ecosystem.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
It embraces peer-to-peer relations and participatory forms of decision-making.
 The latter in particular can be seen as a radical discipline in relational
 spirituality, burning up a lot of the privatized ego.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
It honours the gradual emergence and development of peer-to-peer forms of
 association and practice.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
It affirms the role of both initiating hierarchy, and spontaneously surfacing
 and rotating hierarchy among the peers, in such emergence."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
6.1.D.
 Partnering with nature and the cosmos
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Throughout this essay, I have defined P2P as communal shareholding based
 on participation in a common resource (with the twist that in P2P it is
 we ourselves who are building that resource, which did not previously exist,
 i.e.
 the common is actually the 'object of our cooperation'), whereby other
 partners are considered as equipotent.
 We also mentioned the co-existence within P2P groups of both a kind of
 naturally emerging and flexible hierarchy that aims to increase participation
 to a maximum extent, and egalitarian treatment of the equipotential partners.
 There are very good reasons to believe that we can and should extent this
 ethos to non-human forces, be they natural or cosmic, and if you have this
 kind of faith or experience, with spiritual forces as well.
 What follows is a speculative account of the philosophical and spiritual
 sources that could be used by our culture to recover such ethos.
 Participation emerges here with its central meaning: not that of atomized
 and separate individuals cooperating, but the growth of a consciousness
 that recognizes our mutual embeddedness and interdependence.
 What is emerging is a ‘participative worldview’, but it is also something
 we need to reconstruct.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Indeed in a sense, spiritually, the P2P or ‘participative ethos’ harks back
 to premodern animistic attitudes , which can also be found in Chinese Taoism
 for example.
 An increasing number of anthropologist, such as Steven Tambiah, have argued
 that the magical form of conciousness, is not just an outdated form practiced
 by ancestral humans or contemporary tribal peoples, but that it is a necessary
 adjunct to causality-inspired rational consciousness, that both are needed
 and entwined .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
During the annual SEED conferences in Alququerque, New Mexico, Western astrophys
icians, and philosophers are undertaking a continued dialogue with native
 American elders, as one way to mutually enrich their epistemologies, with
 the explicit aim of recovering participative approaches .
 Jean Gebser, in his masterwork 'The Ever-present Origin', is probably the
 one that has best described the process of recovery of such participative
 worldview, starting with the artists of the beginning of the 20th century
 and continuing with the development of quantum physics, in recent times,
 calling it 'integral consciousness'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Instead of considering nature in a Cartesian fashion as ‘dead matter’ or
 a collection of objects to be manipulated , we recognize that throughout
 nature there is a scale of consciousness or awareness , and that natural
 agents and collectives have their natural propensities, and that, giving
 up our need for domination (or rather 'transforming it') in the same way
 that we are able to practice in P2P processes, we ‘cooperate’, as partners,
 with such propensities, acting as midwives rather than dominators.
 French sociologists like Michel Maffesioli and Philippe Zafirian have analyzed
 a change in our culture, particularly in the new generations of young people,
 which go precisely in that direction, and it is of course specifically
 reflected in sections of green movement.
 Again, this is not a regression to an utopian and lost past, but a re-enactment
 of a potential, but this time, with fully differentiated individuals.
 While there is undoubtedly a new stress on 'wholism' in many contemporary
 thinkers, the stress is on interpretations of interdependence that do not
 return to pre-individual interpretations, but rather on showing on the
 individual is fully co-dependent on the whole.
 In our understanding, this goes much beyond systems theory , as it has
 to include the necessary subjective and intersubjective elements, an approach
 that we have used as a research methodology for this book, and which we
 call integral.
 (see appendix 1.A).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important question is: how do we recover such a tradition of thought
 and feeling-being, we who are the children of the Enlightenment? Here are
 some explorations of 'genealogies of thought' which could be used to recreate
 such participative ethos.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the possible paths is the recovery of the cosmobiological tradition
 of the Renaissance thinkers, who are close to us since they had one foot
 in the world of tradition and one in the world of modernity-inducing change.
 Loren Goldner uncovers, in a very interesting essay , this ‘third stream
 of cosmobiological thought’, which he says could be used to reconstruct
 a post-Enlightenment left.
 He contrasts it with the Aristotelianism of the Church, and with the ‘mechanist
ic’ ideas of the Enlightenment (creators of a dead universe and empty space
 that can be gazed at and manipulated by the autonomous ego).
 He traces the history of this third stream starts with the Renaissance
 starting with Bruno and Kepler, and later continued by Baader, Schelling,
 Oersted, Davy, Faraday, Goethe, W.R.
 Hamilton, Goerg Cantor, Joseph Needham.
 For them, the universe is brimming with life, sensuousness, and meaning,
 and cannot be approached as dead matter.
 Marx explicitly refers to this tradition, and was imbued by it through
 his filiations with German 'idealist' philosophy, but, according to Goldner,
 that has been forgotten by the two dominant streams of the left, i.e.
 social democracy and Stalinism, who take over the mechanistic Enlightenment
 tradition.
 Both Foucauldian postmodernism, and the defense of the Enlightenment tradition
 by Habermas, miss and obscure this vital link as well, says Goldner .
 .
 In any case, this cosmobiological tradition is an 'alternative strand of
 modernity', which lost out but could perhaps be retrieved and redeveloped.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Other important genealogies to recreate a participatory worldview appropriate
 to our age have been undertaken by Smolinowsky and David Skrbna, in their
 'ecophilosophy' .
 The focus here is on the concept of the 'participatory mind' .
 David Abram, in his classic ‘The Spell of the Sensuous’, seeks a source
 in the phenomenological tradition of western philosophy as represented
 by Edmund Husserl and Merleau-Ponty, who replaced the conventional view
 of a single, wholly determinable reality with a fluid picture of the mind/body
 as a participatory organism that reciprocally interacts with its surroundings.
 These different traditions stress the embodiedness of humans in our bodies
 and within nature .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Recently there have been important attempts to rephrase the participatory
 tradition by John Heron and Jorge Ferrer as well, arising from within the
 community of transpersonal psychology.
 The Nature Institute, inspired by Goethe and others, has been working on
 developing conceptions of qualitative science that fits this evolution
 as well.
 Toni Negri and others, are similarly trying to redeveloped a similar 'alternati
ve modernity' based on the oeuvre of Spinoza, though the relationship with
 nature does not seem to be a prominent theme in his writings.
 Rather, they focus on developing a participative relationship with our
 machines .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In any case, there is a natural progression in scope, from P2P groups, to
 the global partnership-based dialogues between religions and civilizations,
 to the new partnership with natural and cosmic forces, that forms a continuum,
 and that is equally expressive of the deep changes in ontology and epistemology
 that P2P represents.
 I do not think it is possible to divorce the P2P ethos as it applies to
 people and humanity, from our wider relationship with nature, and therefore,
 it will be impossible to fully retain either the modernist objective gaze
 or postmodern-inspired nihilism.
 Instead, we have to reconstruct our worldviews and heal our 'split' with
 nature.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And at some point, we will start to realize that our very realities are
 'always-already participative' , that we are not separate from the world,
 that our being-in-the-world is subjective-objective.
 When this happens on a more massive scale, a new civilization will in effect
 have been born.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
6.1.E.
 The Emergence of Peer Circles
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the cultural sphere, all these changes are expressed in the emergence
 of a new organizational formal, that of peer circles.
 We have mentioned the emergence of cooperative inquiry groups and peer
 circles in the field of spirituality, but this is far from the only field
 where they are emerging.
 It used to be that if you wanted to create something new and 'collective',
 you would create a company, a NGO, or campaign for the creation of a new
 government agency.
 But these institutional forms are no longer sufficient to be fully acceptable
 to the P2P ethos.
 Attempts at collective creation, at worldchanging are therefore increasingly
 taking on the new organizational form of peer circles.
 Self-help groups, not a new phenomenon, where a pre-internet prefiguration
 of this trend.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One example are the emergence of giving circles .
 These are groups of people who pool their resources together.
 For example, in the particular format of Full Circles, members donate $1
 per day, or $360 for the year.
 They collectively research local causes that are worthy of support.
 Jock Gill of the Greater Democracy blog has proposed to extend the concept
 to development.
 Giving circles would directly connect with villages in developing countries,
 using internet-enabled videoconferencing, and would fund microcredit schemes.
 He appropriate call its 'citizen to citizen' development based on 'edge
 to edge' relationships.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
7.
 P2P and Social Change
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
7.1.A.
 Marginal trend or premise of new civilization?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I hope to have convinced the reader of this essay that Peer to Peer is a
 fundamental trend, a new and emergent form of social exchange, of the same
 form, an ‘isomorphism’, that is occurring throughout the human lifeworld,
 in all areas of social and cultural life, where it operates under a set
 of similar characteristics.
 In other words, it has coherence.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How important is it, and what are its political implications? Can it really
 be said, as I claim, that it is the premise of a new civilizational order?
 I want to bring out a few historical analogies to illustrate my point.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first concerns the historical development of capitalism.
 At some point in the Middle Ages, starting in the 11th to 13th cy.
 period, cities start to appear again, and commerce takes up.
 A new class of people specialize in that commerce, and finding some aspects
 of medieval culture antithetic to their pursuits, start inventing new instrumen
ts to create trust across great distances: early forms of contracts, early
 banking systems etc..
 In turn, these new forms of social exchange create new processes of subjectivat
ion, which not only influence the people involved, but in fact the whole
 culture at large, eventually leading to massive cultural changes such as
 the Renaissance, the Reformation, the Enlightenment and the great social
 revolutions (English, French, American, etc..).
 In this scenario, though the emergent bourgeois class was not directly
 political, what it did, i.e.
 its primary business of conducting commerce, inevitably created a political
 and civilisational chain reaction.
 This class also had a resource, capital (money), which was greatly needed
 by the other leading sectors of the population, especially the feudal class
 and the kings.
 Even today, for capital, politics is a secondary effect, their enormous
 power is an effect of what they do in the economic sphere: trading currency
 and shares, international capital flows, investments of multinational companies
, the results of a myriad of small decisions by economic regularity bodies
 such as the IMF, etc..
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Today, I would argue, we witness a similar phenomena.
 A new class of knowledge workers, in its broad sense already the majority
 of the working population in the West, and poised to be in the same situation
 elsewhere in a few decades, are creating new practices and tools that enable
 them to do what they need to do, i.e.
 knowledge exchange.
 As they create these new tools, bringing into being a new format of social
 exchange, they enable new types of subjectivation, which in turn not only
 changes themselves, but the world around them.
 When Marx wrote his Manifesto, there were only 100,000 industrial workers,
 yet he saw that this new social model was the essence of the new society
 being born.
 Similarly, even if today only a few million knowledge workers consciously
 practice P2P, one can see the birth of a new model of a much larger social
 consequence.
 This new model is inherently more productive in creating the new immaterial
 use value, just as the merchants and capitalists were more effective in
 the material economy.
 Thus, they have something of value, i.e.
 knowledge and innovation, which is needed by the whole society, as even
 agricultural and industrial production can no longer proceed without their
 intervention.
 As this feedback loop is reinforcing itself, the political consequences
 are equally secondary.
 By creating new social forms, they, we, are doing politics, in the sense
 of creating new realities.
 This does not mean that civil society alone can create a full civilisational
 change, as, inevitably, political conflicts and new lines of contention
 arise, that will draw in the adepts of the new modes of being into the
 political world.
 We have already seen how it is to a great degree the legal and technical
 sabotage of the enemies of P2P, which have driven forward its development.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The great issue will be the reform of the state and the global governance
 system.
 But the P2P social forces come prepared, with highly efficient modes of
 organization and knowledge building.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another analogy I like is the one exposed by Negri in Empire, where he refers
 to the Christians.
 The Roman Empire, in a structural course of decline, could not be reformed,
 but at the same time, within it, the Christians were creating new forms
 of consciousness and organization, which, when the imperial structure collapsed
, was ready to merge with the invading Barbarians and created the new European
 civilization of the Middle Ages.
 There are no Barbarians today, only other rising capitalist blocks such
 as the East Asian one, but they are in the process of creating the very
 same social configuration, which has created P2P in the West, though it
 will take a little more time.
 Civilisational differences will not, in my opinion, preclude the development
 of cognitive capitalism and the emergence of P2P modes of social exchange.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finally, let us put our findings in the context of some social scientists.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
First, Marcel Mauss, and his notion of ‘total social fact’ ; second, to
 the notion of Cornelis Castoriadis, that societies are coherent wholes
 and systems, otherwise they would collapse, animated by a particular kind
 of ‘social spirit’ that is the result of our social imaginary.
 Democratic capitalism was prepared by such an imaginary, the result of
 the religious civil wars and the strong desire to go beyond the feudal
 adversarial model.
 But today, even as it is being globalized, its premises are dying at the
 same time they are being exacerbated.
 The emergence of P2P is therefore to be considered both as a total social
 fact, and as the birth of a new social imaginary.
 P2P is a revolt of the social imaginary about the total fictionalization
 of our society, about its near-total and growing determination by instrumental
 reason and efficiency thinking, that is now even infecting our social and
 personal lives.
 It is a vivid protest, a longing for a different life, not solely dictated
 by calculation and the overriding concern for profit and productivity.
 It is not just protest against the intolerable facets of postmodern life,
 but always already also a construction of alternatives.
 Not an utopia, but really existing social practice.
 And a practice founded on a still unconscious, but coherent set of principles,
 i.e.
 a new social imaginary.
 It is totally coherent, a total social fact.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Habermas has another important notion, which is the ‘principle of organization’
 of society, and he distinguishes the primitive, traditional and liberal-capital
ist principles of organization.
 He defines it as the innovations that become possible through ‘new levels
 of societal learning’.
 Such a level determines the learning mechanism on which the development
 of productive forces depend, the range of variation for the interpretative
 systems that secure identity, amongst others key factors.
 It would seem clear that P2P is precisely such a new learning mechanism,
 described in most detail in the book by Pekka Himanen, as well as in the
 new rules I have identified in this essay.
 Thus in Habermassian terms, we would have to conclude that P2P is a fourth
 principle of organization, emerging at this stage, but which could become
 dominant at a later stage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We’ll leave the latter open as a hypothesis, since history is an open process,
 and indeed different logics can co-exist.
 For example, in democratic capitalism, the two logics of democracy and
 capitalism are co-existing together, forming a coherent whole, even though
 its fabric is now in crisis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My interpretation of P2P is related to the interpretation of Stephan Merten
 and the Oekonux group in Germany, but whereas they see the principles behind
 Free Software as indicative as a new mode of social exchange, I have broadened
 their area of application.
 Free Software is, in my interpretation, one of the forms of the P2P form
 of social exchange.
 While Free Software appears important, especially when taken together with
 the more liberal Open Source format, it is still more marginal than P2P.
 When we look at the same phenomena through the P2P lens, the social changes
 appear much more profound, much more important, than Free Software taking
 alone.
 We are much further ahead of the curve if we follow the P2P interpretation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Nevertheless, when I talk, in such an optimistic and visionary fashion,
 about the emergence of P2P and it being the premise of a coming fundamental
 civilisational change, I can of course also see the terrible trends that
 are affecting our world: fossil energy depletion, global warming, increased
 inequality inside and between countries, the tearing apart of the social
 fabric, the increased psychic insecurity affecting the whole world population,
 the imposition of a permanent war regime that is dismantling civil rights
 and re-introducing the systematic use of torture and lifelong imprisonment
 without trial in the heart of the West, the great extinction affecting
 biodiversity … All these things are happening, and disheartening, even
 though counter-trends from civil society are also sometimes hopeful.
 Certainly, it seems that the power structure of Empire, the new form of
 global sovereignty, is beyond reform, that it just routs around protest
 and democracy, making dissent marginal and inconsequential, even as 25
 million people were protesting an illegitimate war in one single day.
 Corporate media machines will devote days on end on the trial of a celebrity,
 but totally ignore massive literacy campaigns in Venezuela, and millions
 of people demonstrating will deserve just a few seconds of coverage.
 But historically, it is also when change ‘inside’ the system becomes impossible
, that the greatest revolutions occur.
 The evening before the momentous events of May 68, the columnist Bernard
 Poirot-Delpech wrote in Le Monde: nothing ever changes, we are bored in
 this country …
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The question of timing is difficult to answer.
 Objectively, it could take centuries, if we take the historical examples
 of the transition from ancient slavery to feudalism, or from feudalism
 to capitalism.
 Similar to the current situation, both ancient slavery (in the form of
 the conatus system of production, which freed slaves but bound them to
 the land, as of the 2nd and 3rd century), and feudalism, had the germs
 of the new system already within them.
 However, the precipitation of climatic, economic, political crises affecting
 the current world system, as well as the general speeding up of cultural
 change processes, seem to point towards changes that could proceed on a
 much more faster scale.
 If I may allow myself a totally unscientific prediction, then I would say
 that a culmination of systemic crises, and the resulting reform of the
 global governance system, is about two to four decades away.
 But in another sense, such predictions are totally immaterial to the task
 at hand.
 We need P2P today, in order to make our lives more fulfilling, to realize
 our social imaginary in our own lifetime, and to develop the set of methodologi
es that will be needed, that are needed, to help solve the developing crisis.
 We do not have the luxury of waiting for a dawn to come.
 A good example of the maturity of the system for change is what happened
 in Argentina: when the economy totally collapsed, in a matter of months,
 the country’s population had built a series of P2P-based barter and alternative
 money systems (the largest in the world to date), and the significant movement
 of the Piqueteros arose, which, demanded and got from the state a major
 concession: that state money for the unemployed would not go to individuals,
 but the movement as a whole to invest in cooperative projects.
 It all depends on the dialectic between the crises and what the system
 still can offer.
 But if the system fails to provide the hope and the realization of a decent
 life, such an event precipitates the building of alternatives that have
 many of the aspects of P2P that we described.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
7.1.B.
 P2P, Postmodernity, Cognitive Capitalism: within and beyond
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Peer to peer has clearly a dual nature.
 As we have showed, it is the very technological infrastructure of cognitive
 capitalism, the very organizational mode it needs to implement in its global
 teams.
 P2P exemplifies many of the flexible and fluid aspects characteristic of
 fluid modernity (or postmodernity): it disintegrates boundaries and binary
 oppositions, blurs the inside and the outside.
 Just as post- or late feudal society and its absolutist kings needed the
 bourgeoisie, late capitalist society cannot survive without knowledge workers
 and their P2P practices.
 It can be argued that the adoption of P2P processes is in fact essential
 for competitiveness: a strong foundation of P2P technologies, the use of
 free or open source software, processes for collective intelligence building,
 free and fluid cooperation, are now all necessary facets of the contemporary
 corporation.
 The old format of 'pyramidal intelligence', i.e.
 a hierarchy of command and control, in its old bureaucratic format, or
 even as 'management by objectives', based on the assumption of information
 scarcity, is increasingly counter-productive.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the same time, it cannot cope with it very well, and often P2P is seen
 as a threat.
 The entertainment industry for example, wishes to destroy P2P technology.
 In general, corporations are in constant tension between the logic of self-unfo
lding peer groups and the profit-driven logic of the feudally-structured
 management-by-objectives system, and by the tension between the cooperative
 production of innovation and its private appropriation.
 The dot.com crisis of 2001 showed how difficult it is for the present system
 to convert the new use value into exchange value, and created an important
 rift between the affected knowledge workers and the financial capital,
 which had taken them on that ride.
 After the short-term flourishing of the hope for instant riches in the
 dotcom economy, many of them turned their energies to the social sphere,
 where internet-based innovation not only continued, but thrived even more,
 but now based on explicit P2P modes of cooperation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Thus, while being part and parcel of the capitalist and postmodern logics,
 it also already points beyond it.
 From the point of view of capital, it annoys it, but it also needs it to
 thrive and survive itself.
 From the point of view of its practitioners, they like it above all else,
 they know it is more productive and creates more value, as well as meaning
 in their life and a dense interconnected social life, but at the same time,
 they have to make a living and feed their families.
 The not-for-profit nature of P2P is at the heart of this paradox.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the great difficulty, and is why its opponents will not fail to
 point out the so-called parasitical nature of P2P.
 P2P creates massive use-value, but no automatic exchange value, and thus,
 it cannot fund itself.
 It exists on the basis of the vast material wealth created by the presently
 existing system.
 Peer to peer practitioners generally thrive in the interstices of the system:
 programmers in between jobs, workers in bureaucratic organizations with
 time on their hand; students and recipients of social aid; private sector
 professionals during paid for sabbaticals, academics who integrate it into
 their research projects; beneficiaries of corporate or ‘foundation-based’
 patronage.
 However, in terms of open source software, this is increasingly seen as
 essential for technological infrastructure, favored by an increasing numbers
 of governments who want an open standard, and also by rivals to Microsoft,
 who see it as a means of decreasing their dependency.
 It is more and more seen as an efficient means of production, and therefore,
 increasingly funded by the private sphere.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Apart from being an objective trend in society, it is also becoming a subjective
 demand, because it reflects a desired mode of working and being.
 P2P becomes, as it is for this author, part of a positive P2P ethos.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Therefore, a P2P advocacy emerges, which turns the tables around, and it
 becomes a political and social movement.
 What is the main message of this emergent movement? I'll try to paraphrase
 the emerging message, which is being increasingly clearly formulated:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It says: "it is us knowledge workers who are creating the value in the monetary
 system; the present system privately appropriates the results of a vast
 cooperative network of value creation (as we argued in our section about
 the cooperative nature of cognitive capitalism).
 Most value is not created in the formal procedures of the enterprise, but
 despite it, because, despite impediments, we remain creative and cooperative,
 against all odds.
 We come to the job, no longer as workers just renting our bodies, but as
 total subjectivities, with all we have learned in our lives, through our
 myriad social interactions, and solve present problems through our personal
 social networks.
 It is not us knowledge workers living off on you, but you ‘vectoralists’
 living off on us! We are the ones creating infinite use value, which you
 want to render scarce to transform it into tradable intellectual property,
 but you cannot do it without us.
 Even as we struggle to create a commons of information, in the meantime,
 while we lack the strength to totally transform the system, perhaps we
 will be strong enough to impose important transitory demands.
 Therefore, in your own interest, if you want innovation to continue, instead
 of ever larger number of us collapsing from stress-related diseases, you
 have to give us time and money.
 You cannot just use the information commons as an externality, you have
 to fund it.
 Establishing such a system, culminating in the instauration of a universal
 wage divorced from work, is in fact the very condition of your survival
 as an economic system, and at the same time, allows us to thrive as knowledge
 workers, by creating use value, meaning in our lives, time for learning
 and renewal, that we will bring back to your money-making enterprise."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The demand for a universal wage, increasingly debated, subject of academic
 research and government reports, and implemented for the first time in
 a ‘seed form’ in Brazil by President Lula, may well be the next great reform
 of the system, the wise course of action, awaiting its P2P “neo-Keynes",
 a collective able to translate the needs of the cooperative ethos in a
 set of political and ethical measures in the form of a commons-based political
 economy.
 Paradoxically, through the strengthening of cooperation, it will also re-invigo
rate cognitive capitalism (much like the welfare system create mass consumers),
 allowing the two logics to co-exist, in cooperation, and in relative independen
ce from one another, installing a true competition in solving world problems.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The world system undoubtedly needs a number of important reforms.
 Amongst those I can think of is 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
the shift of the monopoly of violence from the nation-state, to an international
 cooperative body in charge of protecting human rights and avoid genocides
 and ethnic cleansings; it is no longer acceptable that any nation-state
 exerts illegitimate violence; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
the setting up of regulatory bodies for the world economy, so that a through
 world society can emerge, in the sense of those proposed by George Soros,
 David Held and others; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
changes in the nature of the system of capital in the sense described by
 Paul Hawken, David Korten, Hazel Henderson, i.e.
 a form of natural capitalism that can no longer appropriate the commons
 and externalize its environmental costs; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
a new integral ‘international account’ systems no longer focused on the
 endless growth of material production, but on well-being indicators; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
changes in the structures of corporations so that it no longer exclusively
 reflects the interests of the shareholders, but of all the stakeholders
 affected by its operations.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With historical hindsight, such a series of fundamental changes are only
 to be expected after major structural crises: they are probably still 20
 to 50 years away .
 In the meantimes, as moles, P2P social forces are preparing the terrain
 for such a change.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Perhaps this is the place where I should explain my attitude to capitalism
 in a more explicit way.
 It is a force which has created material abundance for a part of the world
 population, but at an increasingly unacceptable cost.
 The growth paradigm, the usage without limit of natural resources, the
 pauperization of vast areas in the world, the ‘psychological unsustainability’
 of the high stress model that affects even the elites in the Western states,
 disqualify its survival in its current form.
 The paradox is: the more successful it is , the more it destroyes the material
 and spiritual basis of life.
 But following Alan Page Fiske’s findings, I also believe that some form
 of market exchange will persist, that many people want it.
 This is why I think that we should develop strategies geared to the four
 intersubjective modes of being together and of making the world: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
strengthening peer production and governance; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
strengthening reciprocity-based gift economies on the local and regional
 scale, and fair trade on the international scale; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
reforming the market, through monetary reform, natural capitalism measures,
 reform of the corporation, the introduction of multistakeholdership, etc..
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
reforming the modes of hierarchy, in particular the state form; making it
 a supporter or at least a neutral arbiter in the balance between market
 exchange and the commons; introducting peer governance and multistakeholdership
 modes to offset bureaucratization.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
7.1.C.
 Three scenarios of co-existence
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In our earlier descriptive essay, we already described three possible scenarios
 concerning the entanglement of cognitive capitalism with P2P.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first scenario is peaceful co-existence.
 There are a lot of historical precedents for that.
 In the Middle Ages and other agriculture-based systems, the system of authority
 ranking (feudalism), co-existed with the religious order, organized in
 a form of Communal Shareholding (the Church and the Sangha), which was
 the pillar of a redistributive gift economy.
 In South-East Asia, which accepts temporary spiritual engagement, people
 would move from one sector to the other.
 Similarly, we can envision a continuation of the present system, with knowledge
 workers making money in the private sector, but regularly escaping, as
 much as they possibly can, to participate in the edification of the Commons.
 In this scenario, the one we are currently living and that would be poised
 to continue substantially the same, the current version of capitalism would
 also remain mostly unchanged, though perhaps eventually to be regulated
 by bodies of global governance.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The second scenario is the dark one.
 Cognitive capitalism succeeds in partly incorporating, partly destroying
 the P2P ethos, and an era of information feudalism ensues, a netocratic
 oligarchy based on access to resources and networks, living on rent monopolies
 from intellectual property licenses, as has been described by Jeremy Rifkin
 in the "Age of Access", (and echoed by Jordan Pollack , John Perry Barlow
 and many others) and dis-appropriating any form of property from the consuming
 classes (the consumtariat, as Alexander Bard has coined them).
 It will co-exist with a total control society based on biometric identification
, and will use highly advanced cognitive manipulation.
 But this scenario is predicated on the social defeat of the knowledge workers,
 and we are not there yet.
 In this scenario, access to information is predicated on the payment of
 restrictive licenses, which sharply reduce the freedoms and the creativity
 of the people who have access, while excluding many others from that access.
 Because of this loss of freedom, the loss also of the freedom to fully
 possess goods and to with them as we please, this scenario is often called
 one of 'information feudalism'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The third scenario is, from the point of view of P2P advocates, the more
 hopeful one.
 After a deep structural crisis, the universal wage is implemented, and
 the P2P sphere can operate with increasing autonomy, creating more and
 more use value, slowly creating a cohesive system within the system, a
 'GPL Society', as Stephan Merten would have it .
 At such moment, the new civilization is already born.
 It has to be stressed that P2P is not the same as a totally collectivized
 system, and that it can co-exist with markets and aspects of capitalism.
 But it does not need the current monopolistic system, it can reduce ‘market
 pricing mechanisms’ to their rightful place, as part of the human exchange
 system, not as its totality.
 In my opinion, we would have a core of pure P2P processes, surrounded by
 a gift economy based on shareable goods, a strong social economy run by
 non-profit companies, and a reformed market sector, where prices reflect
 more realistically the true cost of production, such as environmental externali
ties.
 This form of 'natural capitalism' has been described by Paul Hawken, David
 Korten, and Hazel Henderson.
 The main 'inspiring paradigm' would no longer be the competition paradigm
 based on win-lose scenarios, but the collaborative paradigm, where reformed
 corporations and other to-be-invented institutional and non-institutional
 forms, would find their purpose in creating added value to the commons,
 and would attract productive means to the degree they are perceived of
 doing so.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
7.1.D.
 Possible political strategies
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the meantime, while the three scenarios are competing to come into being,
 and if we are sympathetic to the emergence of P2P and its ethos of cooperation:
 “What is to be done?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A first step is to become aware of the isomorphism, the commonality, of
 peer to peer processes in the various fields.
 That people devising and using P2P sharing programs, start realizing that
 they are somehow doing the same thing than the alterglobalisation movement,
 and that both are related to the production of Linux, and to participative
 epistemologies.
 Thus what we must do first is building bridges of cooperation and understanding
 across the social fields.
 Amazingly, it has already started, as the last Porto Alegre forum showed
 an extraordinary enthusiastic reaction to the Open Source event, something
 that would have been unimaginable even a few years ago.
 This coalescing of a powerful social and political movement, a movement
 of movements, seems already to be happening: the alterglobalisation movement,
 the free software/open source movement, the open access and peer science
 movements, the forces aligned against biopiracy and the new intellectual
 property enclosures, the free culture movement, the environmental and other
 protectors of our physical commons, and others, seem increasingly to find
 each other.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We should also start to realize our basic commonality with earlier forms
 of the cooperative ethos: the communal shareholding of the tribal peoples,
 the solidarity movements and mutualities of the industrial workers.
 Following the analysis of Mckenzie Wark we should say that both knowledge
 workers (the hacker class for MW), workers, and farmers as producing classes
 share a similar interest in achieving first, a fairer share of the distribution
 of the surplus (the reformist agenda), and second, achieving control of
 the means of production (the more radical agenda).
 Of course, this can no longer take the form of centralized state control,
 and awaits innovative social practices and demands .
 It is our contention that they will be centered around the peer governance
 of the Commons.
 However, creating the new social reality takes precedence over political
 demands, the latter having to be a consequence of the former.
 Today to resist is in the first place 'to create'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Therefore, the second step is to "furiously" build the commons.
 When we develop Linux, it is there, cannot be destroyed, and by its very
 existence and use, builds another reality, based on another social logic,
 the P2P logic.
 Adopting a network sociality and building dense interconnections as we
 participate in knowledge creation and exchange is enormously politically
 significant.
 By feeding our immaterial and spiritual needs outside of the consumption
 system, we can stop the logic which is destroying our ecosphere.
 The present system may not like opposition, but even more does it fear
 indifference, because it can feed on the energy of strife, but starts dying
 when it is shunted.
 This is what is being expressed by Toni Negri's concept of Exodus, and
 what other call 'Desertion' .
 These commentators note that it was 'the refusal of work' in the seventies,
 with blue-collar workers showing increasing dissatisfaction with the Taylorist/
Fordist system of work, that lead to the fundamental re-arrangement of work
 in the first place.
 In the past, the labor movement and other social movements mostly shared
 the same values, and it was mostly about a fairer share of the pie.
 But the new struggles are mostly about producing a new kind of pie, and
 producing it in a different way.
 Or perhaps an even more correct metaphor: it is about the right to produce
 altogether different kinds of pie.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Today, the new ethic says that 'to resist is in the first place to create'.
 The world we want is the world we are creating through our cooperative
 P2P ethos, it is visible in what we do today, not an utopian creation for
 the future.
 Building the commons has a crucial ingredient: the building of a dense
 alternative media network, for permanent and collective self-education
 in human culture, away from the mass-consumption model promoted by the
 corporate media.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Thus, if there is an 'offensive' strategy it would look like this: to build
 the commons, day after day, the process of creating of a society within
 society.
 In this context, the emergence of the internet and the web, is a tremendous
 step forward.
 Unlike in earlier social formations, knowledge workers and others now have
 access to an important “vector of information
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, to a means for creating, producing, and distributing immaterial products
 that was not available in earlier ages .
 Part of the struggle to build the information commons is the struggle for
 the control of the code (achieving protocollary power) and the creation
 of a ‘friendly’ legal framework, continuing the efforts pioneered by Richard
 Stallman and the General Public License and Lawrence Lessig’s Copyleft
 and 'Creative Commons'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The third step is the defensive strategy.
 When the commons is attacked, it needs to be defended.
 We are thinking of the struggle in the EU to avoid software patents , avoiding
 the installment of digital rights management encoded in the hardware; the
 struggle against biopiracy; against the privatization of water.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Above all else what we need is a society that allows the building of the
 commons, and it is therefore important to refuse measures that would foreclose
 this development.
 Hence the importance of the intellectual property regime, which needs to
 be reformed to avoid a ‘Enclosure of the Digital Commons', and also, we
 have to develop an awareness of the intricacies of protocollary power.
 Since we have no idea about the time span needed for a fuller transition
 to a P2P civilization, what me must do in the meantime is to protect the
 seed, so that it can grow unimpeded, until such time as it is called for
 a greater role.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I would guess that an important part of the struggle for decent life for
 all, important to make space for the development of cooperative practices,
 will be the instauration of a universal living wage .
 So that no one dies from hunger, poverty and exclusion from the world of
 culture.
 So than an increasing number of us can start working on the creation of
 real use value, instead of catering to the artificial desires concocted
 by the global advertising system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The aim of peer to peer theory is to eventually develop a differentiated
 and integrated strategy for political and social change.
 Because it is based on a differentiated understanding of intersubjective
 processes, as developed in the relational model of Alan Page Fiske, it
 realizes that the four modes (equality matching, authority ranking, market
 pricing, and communal shareholding) have always existed, though in different
 combinations.
 It is a fair summary to say that the tribal era was dominated by gift economy
 modes based on reciprocity; that is was followed by the tributary class
 societies of the agricultural age, based on authority ranking; and that
 the industrial age was determined by market pricing.
 The current industrial era has been marked by the attempt to create a state-bas
ed authoritarianism (communism) as an alternative to market pricing; and
 by the current attempt at market totalitarianism under neoliberalism, which
 is in the process of failing.
 Peer to peer theory aims to offer a third alternative: not a commons-based
 totalitarianism, but a society where the other modes are informed by the
 peer to peer principles of civil society: a commons-based society within
 a reformed state and a reformed market.
 That’s also how it differs from the anarchist and socialist models that
 hoped for a marketless and stateless society.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Such a differentiated and integrated strategy would be based on fourfold
 interventions in the different relational and productive domains:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Reform of the stae and global governance modes: We also wish for the creation
 of democratic peer to peer processes so that they can contribute to solving
 some of the crucial issues facing the world.
 This is why the demands of the alterglobalisation movement are sometimes
 considered vague.
 It is because, in this complex world, we know that we do not have all the
 answers.
 But we also know, that through a community of peers, through open processes,
 answers and solutions can emerge, in a way that they cannot if private
 interests and domination structures are not transcended.
 Thus a reform of the global governance system is very important, so that
 every human being voice can be heard..
 Current global governance institutions, as they are organized today (IMF,
 World Bank, WTO), often impede the finding of solutions because they are
 instruments of domination, rather than at the service of the world population.
 It is thus not just a matter of an alternative political program, but of
 alternative processes to arrive at the best solutions.
 I do not personally believe, that change can come <only> from the autonomous
 processes of civil society, and that attention to the state form is therefore
 important.
 Thus politically, peer to peer advocates are interested in the transformation
 of the nation-state, to new forms open to the processes of globality and
 locality, to participatory processes, such as the ones practiced with P2P
 formats.
 The search and development of peer governance practices, based on new forms
 of leadership, will be crucial.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The reform of the market is equally important.
 An economic system that destroys the biosphere, that is predicated on unending
 growth in a finite physical universe, is not sustainable.
 The current monetary system, appropriate for the needs and profits of an
 elite, can only invests ten percent in the productivity economy.
 It must be replaced by smarter complementary currencies, and on a major
 monetary reform that changes scarcity-based money systems, and their hidden
 protocols of exclusion, into participatory protocols.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Regarding the commons such an approach would entail:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
a defense of the physical commons and the development of new institutions
 such as trusts to manage the environment;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
an end to exaggerated private appropriation of the knowledge commons;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
a universal basic income to create the conditions for the expansion of peer
 production;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
any measure that speeds up the distribution of capital.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the field of the gift economy: the promotion of reciprocity-based schemes,
 using alternative currency schemes based on equal time (Time Dollars and
 the like)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finally, peer to peer also demands self-transformation.
 As we said, P2P is predicated on abundance, on transcending the animal
 impulse based on win-lose games.
 But abundance is not just objective, i.e.
 also, and perhaps most importantly, subjective.
 This is why tribal economies considered themselves to live in abundance,
 and were egalitarian in nature.
 This is why happiness researchers show that it is not poverty that makes
 us unhappy, but inequality.
 Thus, the P2P ethos demands a conversion, to a point of view, to a set
 of skills, which allow us to focus ourselves to fulfilling our immaterial
 and spiritual needs directly, and not through a perverted mechanism of
 consumption.
 As we focus on friendships, connections, love, knowledge exchange, the
 cooperative search for wisdom, the construction of common resources and
 use value, we direct our attention away from the artificial needs that
 are currently promoted, and this time we personally and collectively stop
 feeding the Beast that we have ourselves created.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
7.1.E.
 Towards a civil society-based ‘Common-ism’?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Following the summary by Bruno Theret of a school of thought in anthropology,
 human society can best be understood in the form of an “original debt".
 Humans owe their lives to the totality and are therefore thankful to its
 representatives, who eventually become real human and spiritual powers.
 Up to modernity, people owed their lives to the sovereign, representing
 the sacred order, and paid back this debt materially.
 This is the basis of the premodern and ‘feudal’ system of allegiance and
 tribute.
 But this symbolic process is reversed in modernity.
 It is now the sovereign which is indebted to the individuals, he gets his
 power from them, since democratic sovereignity derives now from the people.
 From the point of the individual, he now faces a 'differentiated society'.
 Family life is increasingly liberated from patriarchal domination and becomes
 an egalitarian alliance based on love, with a debt from the parents towards
 the children (instead of the other way around in premodernity).
 In the family, the person is integral.
 However, in the economic order, he 'lends' his labour power to the enterprise,
 who pays back this debt in form of salaries.
 Politically, he delegates his 'political power' to the sovereign, as embodied
 in democratic societies.
 For Bruno Theret, the existence of a differentiated domestic order is of
 crucial importance, as it is the domain of fraternity and reciprocity,
 while the market is the domain of freedom, and the political order is the
 domain of power.
 But based on the domestic order of the family, civil society is being created,
 based on the same principles of fraternity, solidarity, reciprocity, eventually
 giving rise to the great post-war compromise, in which the market was re-embedd
ed in the social, with salaries and a juridical order to protect the social.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This for him, is the seed of a third type of society, not based on a totalitaria
n market (the neoliberal order of the 80s and 90s), which only protects
 'freedom', and in which the market dominates everything, nor on a totalitarian
 state, which only protects equality.
 Rather we have a domestic order, which if it succeeds in expanding civil
 society so that it becomes dominant rather than subordinate, can develop
 a model of 'civil socialism'.
 In order to avoid becoming itself a totalitarian communautarian order,
 it abandons the aim of 'simple equality' for complex equality.
 Such a system accepts partial monopolies in certain differentiated fields,
 but avoids that such monopolies can be converted in other fields.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The above paragraphs are a summary of a long argumentation by Bruno Theret.
 They point to the material basis of a new social and political movement,
 which no longer seeks the takeover of state power, but rather focuses on
 the extension of civil society and its egalitarian values.
 It is no longer ‘communist’, in the Marxist sense, but rather ‘Common-ist".
 It is not lead by a bureaucratic layer of functionaries which aim to be
 integrated in the state system, but is an autonomous growth within civil
 society, using processes of peer governance.
 This is the social movement which will find its expression in the peer
 to peer paradigm and is constructing a social and political alternative.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Appendix 1: Methodology for Research and Interpretation of P2P Theory
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
A.
 The use of a integral framework
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(see below for 
\series bold
B.
 The Sociology of Form and Fiske's Intersubjective Typology
\series default
)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One word about my methodology.
 I have been inspired by mostly two traditions or methods of inquiry: the
 integral method, and the sociology of form.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I use as heuristic device, and as such device only, the four quadrant system
 developed by Ken Wilber (Wilber, 2001).
 This does not mean I share the conclusions of his ‘Theory of Everything’,
 which I think are seriously flawed.
 But as a method for assembling, presenting and understanding my data, I
 find it to be extremely useful.
 The four quadrant system organizes reality in ‘four aspects’, which encompass
 the subjective (evolution of self and subjectivity), the materiality of
 the single organism (objectivity), the intersubjective (the interaction
 of groups of subjectivities and the worldviews and cultures they so create),
 and the behavior of groups of objects, i.e.
 the interobjective perspective of systems.
 The integral theory tradition tries to construct a narrative of the unfolding
 cosmic processes, in explanatory frameworks that enfolds them all.
 It also does this historically, trying to make sense of an evolutionary
 logic, trying to enfold the different historical phases into a unified
 human understanding.
 Apart from the 'neoconservative' Wilberian version of integral theory,
 I have equally been influenced by the 'critical integral theory', or anti-syste
mic 'materialist-subjectivist' account of Toni Negri (Negri, 2001)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If you’d place explanatory theories about the evolution of matter/life/conscious
ness into 2 axis define by the ‘relative attention given to either the parts
 or to the whole’, and another one ‘relative attention given to difference
 or to similarities’, integral theory would be that kind of hermeneutical
 system that pays most attention to the whole, and to structural similarities,
 rather than to the parts and to difference.
 In doing this it runs counter to the general tendency of modern objective
 science to focus on parts (to be analytical), of postmodernism to focus
 on difference, and hence to reject integrative narratives, and to systems
 theories and its follow-ups, which ignore subjectivity.
 It is this distinction from dominant epistemologies, which makes it particularl
y interesting to uncover new insights, missed by the other approaches.
 It is not superior, but complementary to other approaches .
 But a key advantage of the integral framework is that it integrates both
 subjective and objective aspects of realities, refusing to reduce one to
 the other.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To conclude, generally speaking, an integral approach is one that:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
respects the relative autonomy of the different fields, and looks for field
 specific laws
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
affirms that new levels of complexity causes the emergence of new properties
 and thus rejects reductionisms that try to explain the highly complex from
 the less complex
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
always relates the objective and subjective aspects, refusing to see any
 one aspect as a mere epiphenomenona of the other.
 This implies a certain agnosticism as to the theories that posit one particular
 quadrant as the more fundamental cause (such as for example historical
 materialism)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
in general, attempts to correlate explanations emanating from the various
 fields, in order to arrive at an integrative understanding
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My modified form of the four-quadrant system starts with the ‘exterior-individua
l’, i.e.
 single objects in space and time, i.e.
 the evolution of the material basis of the universe, life, and brain (the
 evolution from atoms to molecules to cells etc..), but in my personal modificatio
n, this quadrant includes technological evolution, as I (and others such
 as McLuhan, 1994) can legitimately see technology as an extension of the
 human body.
 Second, we will look at the systems (exterior-collective) quadrant: the
 evolution of natural, political, economic, social and organizational systems.
 Third, we will look at the interior-collective quadrant: human culture,
 spiritualities, philosophies, worldviews.
 In the fourth quadrant we will be discussing the interior-individual aspects,
 and we look at changes occurring within the sphere of the self.
 However, in practice, despite my stated intention, I have found it difficult
 to separate individual and collective aspects of subjectivity and they
 are provisionally treated in one section.
 That this is so is not surprising, since one of the aspects of peer to
 peer is it participative nature, which sees the individual always-already
 embedded in social processes.
 In the context of such a relational self, characterized by a 'cooperative
 individualism', and a network sociality which is also predicated on a retention
 of the achieved individuation aspects, it makes sense to cover both aspects
 together.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\family sans
\shape italic
\size scriptsize
Figure 1: Typology of scientific approaches (ways of looking at the world):
 not available in this version
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\family sans
\shape italic
\size scriptsize
Figure 2: An integral framework for understanding P2P: not available in
 this version
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The combined use of the four quadrants also has important advantages in
 avoiding various kinds of reductionisms:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
the analytical-materialist reductionism (scientism), which attempts to totally
 explain the world of life and culture by the properties and processes of
 matter
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
the biological/Darwinist reductionism, which attempts to totally explain
 the life of culture by the animalistic processes of survival of the fittest.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The 'wholistic' reductionism of the system sciences, which do not take into
 account the agency of the subject
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The linguistic reductionism of extreme postmodernists, which tend to totally
 bypass materiality and reduce everything to language games
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In conclusion: the integral approach allows us to use these various partial
 perspectives and to use them as heuristic devices, so that we can obtain
 a fuller picture combining them.
 What distinguishes an 'integral approach' from the other approaches is
 its use of a subjective-objective explanatory framework.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Reading the manuscript, many readers may ask themselves: what is most important:
 1) the change and evolution of human consciousness; or 2) the material
 structures in which P2P is embedded.
 I will discuss this more in detail in the section on 'technological determinism
', but here I want to point out how an integral approach avoids a chicken
 and the egg debate.
 Yes, P2P reflects prior changes in human consciousness (before being implemente
d, they were thought, and these thoughts reflects new ways of feeling/being/know
ing/valuing); but also, the existence of technological and other structures
 enables further changes in human mentalities.
 What an integral approach allows us to do, if we are interested in promoting
 social and political change, is to device strategies that are active in
 the different quadrants at the same time, and so create a positive feedback
 loop between them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the following pages, I do not aim to create a 'Theory of Everything'.
 I try to function as an integrator, as everyone is obliged to do today,
 i.e.
 construct temporary and malleable integrative understandings, which are
 then confronted with other ones.
 The only moral and scientific obligation is that such integration embrace
 as much of reality, as one possibly can.
 Thus, the following is an integration of all the descriptive, explanatory
 and social-evolutionary (i.e.
 historicized in social formations) strands, that I can possibly hold together
 in a coherent fashion.
 And the 'object' of this integration is 'Peer to Peer'.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
B.
 The Sociology of Form and Fiske's Intersubjective Typology
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If the above integral approach has guided me as a safeguard to avoid proposing
 overtly reductionist interpretations and to cast my net as wide as possible,
 as well as for the organization of the subject matter, then the search
 for 'isomorphism' has been of great value in precisely defining what P2P
 is and how it differs from its close cousins, such as the gift economy.
 The method involves looking at the emergence of a same form throughout
 the social field, to define its precise characteristics in a ideal type
 as we gathered more information, which then in turn again helps in differentiat
ing 'pure P2P' from its derivatives.
 The sociology of form focuses neither on the parts (individuals and their
 choices), nor on the collective as a whole (society and its socialization),
 but on the interaction between the parts, their 'form of exchange' .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Particular usage is made of Alan Page Fiske's (see section 3.4 for a description
 and Fiske, 1993) quaternary model of human intersubjective relationships,
 a typology of four forms through which humans can relate to each other.
 Therefore this book, as an attempt to develop a P2P theory, is a description
 of one of the major forms, which Fiske calls 'Communal Shareholding'.
 And the key argument of the book is that P2P is actually a new form of
 Communal Shareholding and I will discuss in detail how it differs from
 the three other forms of intersubjectivity.
 Fiske's framework gives a larger context of yet to be fully developed theory
 of social change which should encompass four basic constituents, as well
 as a theory of how they relate together in the contemporary social system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
- Market theory: how can we think either about a 'market without capitalism'
 or at the very least about a 'deeply socialized capitalism'.
 Since I believe that the present format of neoliberal capitalism is unsustainab
le both in natural and psychic resources, and given that some form of market
 is both acceptable and necessary, how do we formulate a new market theory?
 A market within society has almost always existed, and is acceptable, but
 what is not acceptable is a 'market society', where everything is determined
 through a market.
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
- Hierarchy theory or state theory: how do we achieve forms of leadership
 which promote participation rather than aim at the extension of their own
 monopolies.
 I should be looking to theories of servant leadership, leaderless corporations,
 and the like.
 How do we get a state that is not beholden to monopolistic corporate interests,
 but can offer a fair arbitrage, in the public interest, between market-,
 gift economy, and P2P-based alternatives.
 How to develop peer governance and multistakeholdership?
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
- Gift Economy theory: how can we reinstate/reinforce material production
 based on reciprocity and cooperative relationships.
 The key here is to investigate 'complementary currencies' and cooperative
 production generally.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Appendix 2.
 Launch of The Foundation for P2P Alternatives
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My purpose in this book is also political.
 I believe that a P2P-based civilization, or at least one that has much
 stronger elements of it compared with today, would be a better civilization,
 more apt to tackle the global challenges that we are facing.
 This is why I propose that this essay is not just part of a process of
 understanding, but that it can be a guide to an active participation in
 the transformation of our world, into something better, more participative,
 more free, more creative.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I therefore announce the creation of a Foundation for P2P Alternatives.
 It would be centered around the following conclusions, the support for
 which you can find in the essay:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
that technology reflects a change of consciousness towards participation,
 and in turn strengthens it
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
that the networked format, expressed in the specific manner of peer to peer
 relations, is a new form of political organizing and subjectivity, and
 an alternative for the political/economic order, which though it does not
 offer solutions per se, points the way to a variety of dialogical and self-orga
nizing formats to device different processes for arriving at such solutions;
 it ushers in a era of ‘nonrepresentational democracy’, where an increasing
 number of people are able to manage their social and productive life through
 the use of a variety of networks and peer circles
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
that it creates a new public domain, an information commons, which should
 be protected and extended, especially in the domain of common knowledge
 creation; and that this domain, where the cost of reproducing knowledge
 is near zero, requires fundamental changes in the intellectual property
 regime, as reflected by new forms such as the free software movement
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
that the principles developed by the free software movement, in particular
 the General Public License, provides for models that could be used in other
 areas of social and productive life - that it reconnects with the older
 traditions and attempts for a more cooperative social order, but this time
 obviates the need for authoritarianism and centralization; it has the potential
 of showing that the new egalitarian digital culture, is connected to the
 older traditions of cooperation of the workers and peasants, and to the
 search for an engaged and meaningful life as expressed in one’s work, which
 becomes an expression of individual and collective creativity, rather than
 as a salaried means of survival
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
that it offers youth a vision of renewal and hope, to create a world that
 is more in tune with their values; that it creates a new language and discourse
 in tune with the new historical phase of ‘cognitive capitalism’; P2P is
 a language which every ‘digital youngster’ can understand
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
it combines subjectivity (new values), intersubjectivity (new relations),
 objectivity (an enabling technology) and interobjectivity (new forms of
 organization) that mutually strengthen each other in a positive feedback
 loop, and it is clearly on the offensive and growing, but lacking ‘political
 self-consciousness’.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Foundation for P2P Alternatives would address the following issues:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
P2P currently exists in discrete separate movements and projects but these
 different movements are often unaware of the common P2P ethos that binds
 them
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
thus, there is a need for a common initiative, which 
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Enumerate
brings information together; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
connects people and mutually informs them 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
strives for integrative insights coming from the many subfields; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
can organize events for reflection and action;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
can educate people about critical and creative tools for world-making
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
the Foundation would be a matrix or womb which would inspire the creation
 and linking of other nodes active in the P2P field, organized around topics
 and common interests, locality, and any form of identity and organization
 which makes sense for the people involved
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
the zero node website would have a website with directories, an electronic
 newsletter and blog, and a magazine.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Appendix 3: The P2P Meme Map
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\series bold
\size large
(read the table from the bottom up) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Compiled by Michel Bauwens, June 30, 2005
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The following is an attempt to summarize the findings of the P2P research
 in a compressed manner.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Level one represents the cultural shift in ways of being, feeling and knowing,
 as well as the new core value constellations that underpin the shift to
 a peer to peer civilization.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Level two represents the technological distributed computing infrastructure,
 the P2P media infrastructure which enables many-to-many communication,
 and the collaborative infrastructure which allows autonomous groups to
 cooperate on a global scale, outside the bounds of markets and hierarchies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Level three represents the legal infrastructure.
 The General Public License (and Open Source initiatives), which creates
 and expands the P2P technological infrastructure as a public domain Commons;
 Creative Commons licenses achieve the same effect for content creation.
 Technological protocols such as TCP/IP insure the participative nature
 of new technologies, while P2P collectives set their own internally-generated
 frameworks of cooperation, within the broader framework of Internet-based
 civility (netiquette).
 Taking together they create a common property regime of public goods outside
 the market and the state.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Level 4 represents new social practices that are thoroughly characterized
 by P2P principles (as distinguished from non-P2P formats enabled by P2P
 infrastructures).
 The first strand is represented by 'non-representational politics', politics
 which refuses representation, as exemplified by the alterglobalisation
 movement and Social Forums, the coordination format adopted by social movements.
 Peer production creates collective use value in the form of a Commons,
 and is exemplified by free software, knowledge collectives such as Wikipedia,
 collaborative publishing such as Indymedia.
 Participative spirituality represents a new way of relating to religions,
 the cosmos, and nature and its beings, refusing authoritarian truths and
 methods, sometimes practiced in the form of peer circles.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Level 5 are practices that are not full P2P themselves, but are enabled
 and strengthened by P2P infrastructures: examples are P2P marketplaces
 which do not create a commons and are run by for-profit enterprises, or
 who derive substantial value from user-created content ('netarchical' enterpris
es who enable and exploit participative networks); gift economies or sharing
 economies (the latter defined by Yochai Benkler), such as local exchange
 trading systems and local currencies;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Figure – The P2P Meme Map
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
TO READ FROM THE BOTTOM UP!!!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Empire/cognitive capitalism rests on distributed networking but instrumentalises
 it for domination
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
P2P-based marketplaces and Long Tail economics: eBay, Zopa, self-publishing;
 supply and demand meat each other through the internet; creating millions
 of sustainable micro-markets
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Netarchical value creation / for-profit enablement and exploitation of participa
tive networks: positive externalities of P2P create value for new type of
 businesses: Amazon customer evaluations, Google page ranking based on user
 linking; user-centric innovation; users create substantial content for
 the portals
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Bottom of the pyramid development schemes (Prahalad); microcredit (collective
 credit applications); citizen to citizen (edge to edge) development schemes
 (Jock Gill)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Gift and sharing economy practices are enabled by P2P infrastructures: open
 money and local currency schemes, local exchange trading systems (LETS);
 carpooling becomes economical with distributed infrastructures; nonprofit
 organizations and social entrepreneurships are enabled.
 Lower transactional costs strengthen enable fairer trade and economics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Level 5: P2P-ENABLED PRACTICES
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
1.A.
 Non-representational politics: networked alterglobalism, coordination formats
 for social struggles, conceptual innovation of multitudes (Negri), creation
 as resistance (Benasayag), revolution without power (Holloway)
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
=> CREATION OF ABSOLUTE DEMOCRACY MODELS
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
1.B.
 Autonomous social and cultural practices: internet-based affinity groups,
 self-help and mutual support groups, non-expert dominated knowledge creation,
 validation, and exchange, filesharing; open science projects and open access
 to scientific publications
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
=> CREATION OF THE INFORMATION COMMONS
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
2.
 Peer production (also called, Commons-Based Peer Production CBPP): Free
 software and open source software (also called Free/Libre Open Source Software
 FLOSS): GNU/Linux; Knowledge collectives: Wikipedia, Collaborative Media:
 Indymedia
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
=> THIRD MODE OF PRODUCTION CREATES FOR-BENEFIT SECTOR
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
3.
 Participatory spirituality: non-representational dialogue of religion,
 contributory theology, cooperative inquiry practices (John Heron), plural
 mysticism (Jorge Ferrer), peer circles
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
=> PLURALISTIC CONTRIBUTORY SPIRITUALITY
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Subsubsection*
NON-REPRESENTATIONAL POLITICS & AUTONOMOUS SOCIAL ORGANISATION // PEER PRODUCTIO
N // PARTICIPATORY SPIRITUALITY
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Level 4: DIRECT P2P PRACTICES
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
New Common Property Regime: General Public License, Open Source Initiative,
 Creative Commons, Art libre License allow for creation that cannot be privately
 appropriated
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Participative Technological Protocols: TCP/IP protocol for P2P communication,
 Writeable Web protocols allow self-publishing by everyone, Viral Communicator
 Meshwork protocols enable network building without infrastructures and
 backbones: Open Spectrum proposal would create Wireless Commons
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Participative Social Protocols: netiquette, project constitutions, social
 accounting and reputation-based schemes create transparency, participation
 capture turns self-interest into common resources
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
NEW COMMON PROPERTY REGIME // PARTICIPATIVE TECHNOLOGICAL PROTOCOLS // PARTICIPA
TIVE SOCIAL PROTOCOLS
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Level 3: P2P LEGAL INFRASTRUCTURE
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
1.A.
 Distributed computing infrastructure (hardware): Internet, Grid Computing,
 Filesharing, Wireless Meshwork, Viral Communicators
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
1.B.
 Free Software / Open source software infrastructure: GNU/Linux, OS Desktop
 applications, OS content management software, OS communication tools
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
2.
 Distributed media infrastructure: Blogging (Writeable Web), Podcasting
 (audio), Webcasting (broadband audiovisual)
\end_layout

\begin_layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000
3.
 Distributed collaboration infrastructure: Wiki's, social software, groupware
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING // DISTRIBUTED MEDIA // DISTRIBUTED COLLOBARATION
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Level two: P2P TECHNOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
New ways of feeling and being: participative cosmologies, the relational
 self, cooperative individualism
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
New ways of knowing: connectivist learning, communal (not institutional)
 validation of knowledge, transparency (not objectivity)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Primacy of Equality/freedom, the hacker ethic of self-unfolding 'passion-based'
 cooperation, abundance over scarcity, participation over exclusion, meritocrati
c servant leadership by example, coordination instead of command and control
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Desire for P2P Civilization to be defined by: 1) Absolute Democracy: participati
on of all extended to all areas of social life, not just politics; a Pluralist
 Economy with a strong Commons sector along with a reformed market and state;
 a Participative Universe based on partnership with nature and its beings
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
P2P ONTOLOGY // P2P EPISTEMOLOGY // P2P AXIOLOGY
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(New ways of feeling and being // New ways of knowing // New core value
 constellation and aspirations)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Level one: P2P CULTURAL FOUNDATIONS AND VALUE FIELD 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*

\shape smallcaps
\size large
BIBLIOGRAPHY
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(under construction) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Books
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Abbate, Janet.
 Inventing the Internet.
 MIT Press, 1999
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ackerman, Frank and Lisa Heinzerling.
 Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value of Nothing.
 New Press, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Aigrain, Philippe.
 Cause Commune.
 L'information entre bien commun et propriete.
 Fayard, 2005
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Albert, Michael.
 Parecon.
 Verso, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Arquila, John and David Ronfeldt.
 Eds.
 Networks and netwars.
 Rand Corporation, 2001
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Axelrod, Robert.
 The Evolution of Cooperation.
 New York: Basic Books, 1984
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Barbrook, Richard.
 Media Freedom.
 Pluto, 1995
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Bard, Alexander and Jan Soderqvist.
 Netocracy.
 Financial Times Prentice-Hall, 2002
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Beck, Don and Christopher Cowan.
 Spiral Dynamics.
 Blackwell, 1996
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Benasayag, Miguel.
 Du contre-pouvoir.
 La Decouverte, 2002
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Boltanski, Luc and Eve Chiapello.
 Le Nouvel Esprit du Capitalisme.
 Gallimard, 1999
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Bornstein, David.
 How to Change the World: Social Entrepreneurs and the Power of New Ideas.
 Oxford University Press, 2005
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Braudel, Fernand.
 Wheels of Commerce.
 University of California Press, 1992
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Buchanan, Mark.
 Nexus: Small Worlds and the Groundbreaking Science of Networks.
 W.
 W.
 Norton & Company, 2002
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Campbell, June.
 Traveller in Space.
 Diane, 1996
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Castoriadis, Cornelius.
 L'institution Imaginaire de la societe.
 Seuil, 1975
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Chomski, Noam and Edward S.
 Herman.
 Manufacturing Consent.
 Pantheon, 2002
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Coulter, Arthur.
 Synergetics.
 Prentice-Hall Trade, 1976
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari.
 Capitalisme et Schizophrenie.
 Tome 2: Milles Plateaux.
 Ed.
 De Minuit, 1980.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Dumont, Louis.
 Homo Hierarchicus: the caste system and its implications.
 University of Chicago Press, 1981
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Elias, Norbert.
 La dynamique de l'occident.
 Calman-Levy, 1975
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Feenberg, Andrew.
 1) Critical Theory of Technology.
 Oxford University Press, 1991; -- 2) Questioning Technology.
 Routledge, 1999
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ferrer, Jorge N.
 Revisioning Transpersonal Theory: A Participatory Vision of Human Spirituality.
 SUNY, 2001
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fisher, William F III.
 Promises to Keep.
 Technology, Law, and the Future of Entertainment.
 Stanford University Press, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fiske, Alan Page.
 Structures of Social Life.
 Free Press, 1993
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Foucault, Michel.
 Power/Knowledge.
 Harvester Press, 1980.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Gilmor, Dan.
 We the Media.
 O'Reilly, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Greenwood, Susan.
 The Nature of Magic: an anthropology of consciousness.
 http://www.philhine.org.uk/writings/ess_naturemagic.htmlBerg, 2005
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Gunderson, Lance H.
 and C.S.
 Holling.
 Panarchy: Understanding Transformations in Systems of Humans and Nature.
 Island Press, 2001
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Heron, John.
 Sacred Science.
 PCCS Books, 1998
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hutchins, E.
 Cognition in the Wild.
 MIT Press, 1995.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Galloway, Alexander .
 Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentralization MIT Press, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Gorz, Andre.
 L'Immateriel.
 Galilee, 2003
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Haskell, Edward.
 Full Circle.
 Gordon and Breach, 1972
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Himanen, Pekka.
 The Hacker Ethic and the Spirit of the Information Age.
 Random House, 2002
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hodgkinson, Tom.
 How to be Idle.
 HarperCollins, 2005
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Inglehart, Ronald.
 Culture Shift in Advanced Industrial Society.
 Princeton University Press, 1989
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Jackall, Robert.
 Moral Mazes.
 Oxford University Press, 1989.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Jenkins, Henry.
 Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Intersect.
 New York University Press, 2005
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Kane, Pat.
 The Play Ethic: A Manifesto for a Different Way of Living.
 Macmillan, 2003
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Kramer, Joel and Diane Alstad.
 The Guru Papers.
 Frog, 1993
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lahire Bernard.
 La culture des individus - Dissonances culturelles et distinction de soi.
 La Découverte, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lasica, J.D.
 Darknet: Hollywood's War against the Digital Generation.
 John Wiley & Sons, 2005
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lazzarato, Maurizio.
 Les Revolutions du Capitalisme.Les Empecheurs de Penser en Rond, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lessig, Lawrence.
 1) The Future of Ideas.
 Vintage, 2002; 2) Free Culture.
 Penguin, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Malone, Thomas.
 The Future of Work.
 How the New Order of Business Will Shape Your Organization, Your Management
 Style, and Your Life.
 Harvard Business School Press, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Markides, Constantino and Paul Geroski.
 Fast Second: How Smart Companies Bypass Radical Innovation to Enter and
 Dominate New Markets.
 Jossey-Bass, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
McLuhan, M.
 Understanding media: the extensions of Man.
 Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1994
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Mumford, Lewis.
 Technics and Civilisation.
 Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1934
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Negri, Toni and Michael Hardt.
 Empire.
 Harvard University Press, 2001
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Nielsen, Jeffrey S.
 The Myth of Leadership.
 Davis-Black Publishing, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ostrom, Elinor.
 Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action.
 New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Raymond, Eric.
 The Cathedral and the Bazaar.
 O’Reilly, 2001
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Rifkin, Jeremy.
 The Age of Access.
 J.P.
 Tarcher, 2001
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ross, Andrew.
 No-Collar.
 The Humane Workplace and its Hidden Cost.
 Basic Books, 2001.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ryan, Frank.
 Darwin's Blind Spot: Evolution Beyond Natural Selection.
 Houghton-Mifflin, 2002
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Sagot-Duvauroux, Jean-Louis.
 Pour la Gratuite.
 Desclee-De Brouwer, 1995
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Sahlins, Marshall D.
 Stone Age Economics.
 Aldine, 1972
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Schumpeter, Joseph.
 Essays on Entrepreneurs, Innovations, Business Cycles, and the Evolution
 of Capitalism.
 Transaction Publishers, 1997
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Skolimowski, Henryk.
 The Participatory Mind.
 Penguin, 1995
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Skrbina, David.
 Panpsychism in the West.
 MIT Press, 2005
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Stallman, Richard.
 Free Software, Free Society.
 Free Software Foundation, 2002
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Stewart, John.
 Evolution’s Arrow.
 Chapman Press, 2000
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Surowiecki, James.
 The Wisdom of Crowds.
 Anchor, 2005
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Taylor, Michael.
 The Possibility of Cooperation.
 Cambridge University Press, 1987
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Tuomi, Ilkka.
 Networks of Innovation.
 Oxford Press, 2003
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Vercelonne, Carlo, dir.
 Sommes-nous sorti du capitalisme industriel? La Dispute, 2003
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Vibert, Stephane.
 Louis Dumont: holisme et modernite.
 Michalon, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
von Hippel, Eric.
 The Democratization of Innovation.
 MIT Press, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wallerstein, Immanuel.
 The Essential Wallerstein.
 New Press, 2000
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wark, McKenzie.
 A Hacker Manifesto.
 Harvard University Press, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Weber, Max.
 The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.
 Routledge, 2001
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Weber, Steve.
 The Success of Open Source.
 Harvard University Press, 2004
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wilber, Ken.
 A Theory of Everything.
 Shambhala, 2001
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Zafirian, Philippe.
 A quoi sert le travail.
 La Dispute, 2003 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Essays
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Benkler, Yochai.
 1) Coase’s Penguin, or Linux and the Nature of the Firm.
 URL = 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://www.yale.edu/yalelj/112/BenklerWEB.pdf"

\end_inset

 ; 2) Sharing Nicely: On Shareable Goods and the Emergence of Sharing as
 a Modality of Economic Production.
 URL = 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://www.yalelawjournal.org/pdf/114-2/Benkler_FINAL_YLJ114-2.pdf"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Frischmann, Brett.
 An Economic Theory of Infrastructure and Commons Management, 89 Minnesota
 Law Review 4, April 2005.
 URL = 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=704463"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Rost, Joseph C., “Leadership Development in the New Millennium." The Journal
 of Leadership Studies", 1993, Vol.
 1, No.
 1, pp.
 92-110.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
