#LyX 1.6.4.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 345
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\author "" 
\author "" 
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
The Californian Ideology
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
John Haltiwanger, Marc Stumpel, and Sjoerd Tuinema
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the Californian Ideology, Richard Barbrook and Andy Cameron describe
 a set of beliefs for the current information age that combines techno-utopianis
m and support for neoliberal economic policies with bohemian and anti-authoritar
ian attitudes from the counterculture movement of the 60s: The Californian
 Ideology.
 The authors describe it as a utopian vision that has emerged from Silicon
 Valley and the West Coast, which promotes the faith in the emancipatory
 potential of the new information technologies.
 In this optimistic vision of the future a lot of inequalities will disappear
 through the use of new information technologies: ‘In the digital utopia,
 everybody will be both hip and rich’.
 The authors claim that the Californian ideology is the ruling philosophy
 for the information society.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The article can be seen as an answer to the question that Esther Dyson poses
 in 'Cyberspace and the American Dream: A Magna Carta for the Knowledge
 Age' (1994) :“Who will shape the nature of cyberspace and its impact on
 our lives and institutions?” Within the Californian ideology the goal is
 to create a new ‘Jeffersonian democracy’.
 Hereby they refer to Thomas Jefferson, who wrote the United States Declaration
 of Independence in 1776.
 In the new Jeffersonian democracy all individuals would be able to express
 themselves freely within cyberspace.
 One year after this article was originally published cyber-libertarian
 John Perry Barlow wrote ‘The Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace’
 for Wired, which is obviously aligned with Barbrook’s and Cameron’s ideas.
 Wired is also referred to as the bible of ‘the virtual class’, which Barbrook
 and Cameron describe as skilled hi-tech entrepreneurs that use new technologies
 to ‘empower the individual, enhance personal freedom, and radically reduce
 the power of the nation-state’.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
According to the authors the hybridization of radical, anti-corporate activism
 and entrepreneurial, free market spirit is made possible by the ‘nearly
 universal’ belief in technological determinism.
 There lies a hybrid faith within the ‘Californian’ future: both the New
 Left and the New Right will have economical liberating possibilities.
 The New Left’s virtual community will be able create a hi-tech 'gift economy'
 the authors call ‘electronic agora’ without bureaucracy or corporatism
 and the New Right will turn cyberspace into a marketplace where competition
 is the rule.
 Barbrook and Cameron describe how this will inevitably lead to a mixed
 economy; ’a creative and antagonistic mix of state, corporate and d.i.y.
 initiatives’.
 The authors eventually call for a European strategy of conducting a cyberspace
 that is more inclusive and universal, unlike the elitism of the California
 ideology, where hi-tech artisans can be more productive in a mixed economy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There also has been a lot of uproar with the raised problematics of Californian
 Ideology.
 Several responses can be found on the Hypermedia Research Center website,
 amongst those is one of former publisher and founder of Wired, Louis Rossetto.
 One of the major disagreements Rossetto has, is against the new presupposed
 techno-social apartheid that the Californian Ideology would impose, according
 to Barbrook and Cameron.
 "Lack of money? Online is cheaper than cable television, and you can get
 a new computer for less than $1000, a used one less than $500", essentially
 this is a viable answer to the objections of the original authors.
 Then again, they never describe in detail if (and which) hardware or software
 is exactly what's causing this apartheid.
 Of course, everyone will be able to afford a computer, but still, this
 doesn't change anything for the power and information distribution, that
 the California market still reigns upon.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Also Rossetto highly disagrees with the praise towards the European net-strategi
es: "The true measure of the failure of European (..) direction of technology
 can be measured by the fact that in ten years, during the biggest technology
 boom the planet has ever witnessed, Europe has gone from a net exporter
 of technology, to a net importer." This surpassing would be described to
 "High European taxes which have restricted spending on technology and hence
 retarded its development".
 In his view, the technology-boom has been so succesful because it sprouted
 under a free capitalistic market, which isn't state influenced (in contrast
 to the European over-protectism).
 What shows from this critisism is that Rossetto clearly uses a different
 parameters for the technological succeses.
 He qualifies exactly the New Right liberalism values that Barbrook and
 Cameron describe and although he doesn't go in detail about the New Left
 'ecotopia', he fits the picture about the contradictionary values and similarly
 ignores further socio-political implications it carries.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In another article, coming from Franco Berardi, there's again some response
 towards the European approaches to state telecommunication services (like
 MINITEL): "Stopping globalization, preserving identities: these are the
 ideas which are generating nationalism and fundamentalism", thus, he finds
 the American approach more suitable as a truely open and mainstream network.
 To look at the possibilities outside the current power-structures Berardi
 concludes: "The industrial world is fading, the industrial composition
 of labour is dissolving, and a new composition of social activity is emerging.
 But the capitalist code is still pervading it.
 And in its current virtual (dis)incarnation, capitalism seems to be a system
 without any alternative." And referencing to the Euro-protectionistic Net
 markets: "The alternative cannot be found in the past."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The anti-government, neoliberal side of the "Californian Ideology" is its
 most transforming and destructive feature.
 It seems redundant that one has to bother with refuting the claims of neolibera
l economics, given the latest economic collapse.
 There is also steady decline of the US economy relative to the more managed
 economies of Europe and, of course, China over the last decade to consider.
 Within the realm of ICT, the US' irrational adherence to neoliberal economics
 is the very reason why it ranks 14th worldwide in broadband quality scores
 as of August 2008.
 ( 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://internetinnovation.org/factbook/entry/top-20-broadband-leaders-penetration-households/"

\end_inset

 ).
 While not often discussed in such explicit terms, broadband adorption is
 the literal line of the digital divide between the 'information-rich' and
 the 'information-poor.' In 2008, 55% of adult Americans have broadband access
 to the Internet.
 However, "Poorer Americans saw no growth in broadband adoption in the past
 year while at the same time nearly one-third of broadband users pay more
 to get faster connections." ( 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2008/Home-Broadband-2008.aspx"

\end_inset

 ) The United States total focus on stale "free market" ideology in the
 face of effective duopolies in most markets has resulted in an ever-widening
 gap.
 Every year it slips further in broadband adoption rates, despite obvious
 measures that could be taken to immediately reverse this trend and push
 broadband into the reach of all.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In 2000, the Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communication (then
 known as the Ministry of Post and Telecommunication) explicitly "limited
 the interconnection rates that NTT’s operating companies (NTT East and
 NTT West) could charge independent DSL providers.” ( 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://www.ictregulationtoolkit.org/en/PracticeNote.aspx?id=2644"

\end_inset

 ) The impact of this move cannot be overstated:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"The acceptance of these rules by the dominant incumbent carrier, NTT, led
 to rapid DSL deployment in Japan by NTT as well as new entrants, such as
 Yahoo!BB and eAccess.
 Yahoo!BB launched its DSL service in late 2001, charging about $20 for
 up to 1.5 Mbps links.
 Within a few years these access speeds grew to as fast as 50 Mbps for subscribe
rs located near central offices.
 (In Japan over 90% of households are within 7 kilometres.
 of central offices.)"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In Japan the average price per megabit was $0.70.
 Compare this to the $4.90 average that Americans pay and it becomes immediately
 apparent just why Japan is at the top of broadband quality scores.
 By forcing NTT to share its lines for a reasonable price, Japan has successfull
y provided affordable internet access to its citizens.
 That forcing competition in this space would cause immediate benefits would
 seem like a natural argument to advocates of a "free market." This, however,
 is not the case.
 Mainstream discussion in the USA about Japan's forced line sharing is virtually
 nonexistent.
 When it does come up, it is mentioned so briefly as to seem like deliberate
 attempts to avoid discussing it, such as this from a 2009 techworld.com
 article: "Part of Japan's policy focuses on incumbent carriers sharing
 their networks with competitors, a policy NTT East has criticized." The
 article is about a government initiative, uJapan, that "provides money
 for cities to wire schools and community centers, provides zero-interest
 or low-interest loans for cities and businesses to deploy broadband, and
 provides tax breaks for the purchase of networking equipment"--a policy
 Barbrook and Cameron would surely love.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Japan's policy here is a clear statement of the government's considerations
 towards including all citizens in the online world.
 Finland has gone even further, mandating a broadband internet connection
 as a right of every citizen.
 While Japan's method does not entirely solve the digital divide, it does
 make access significantly more affordable.
 Finland's method is a direct opposition to the Californian Ideology.
 As the United States continues to fall behind in both broadband adoption
 and offerings, the contradiction at the center of this ideology becomes
 more and more apparent.
 It is a good sign that many countries are not following the Californian
 Ideology in lockstep.
 Even more important, however, is how they prove that ideology false as
 their infrastructure evolves so much more rapidly than the neoliberal United
 States.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\series bold
Sources
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Louis Rossetto's response on the Hypermedia Research Center webstie: 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://www.hrc.wmin.ac.uk/hrc/theory/californianideo/response/t.4.2.6.html"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Franco Berardi's response on the Hypermedia Research Center website: 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://www.hrc.wmin.ac.uk/hrc/theory/californianideo/response/t.4.2.6%5B1%5D.html"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
