
# Gunkel #

David J. Gunkel centers his 'Second thoughts: toward a critique of the digital divide' on the ambiguous, yet ubiquitous, nature of the term 'digital divide.' In the terms of Latour, he sees the term as a matter of contention. His reaction is to push for a broadened understanding of the plural nature of the term. Tracing the origins of 'digital divide' through the claims made by one of its main promoters (the US Department of Commerce's National Telecommunications and Information Administration, or NTIA) as to where they found it, they come across journalism discussing a division between those who held faith in technology to solve the world's problems and those that had misgivings about having such faith. Even at this early stage there is a binary modulation on a much more complicated scenario--for instance, those that have faith in technology to have the _potential_ to solve problems might not have deep reservations about answering in affirmative if that potential was phrased in technodetermistic terms in a survey question. As the term continues its unfolding into its present state as a household term, it retains these binary and technodetermistic attributes and gains a plurality of definitions. From hardware clashes between digital and analog devices coexisting in information networks to being situated as analagous to a 'racial ravine' where statistics show correlations to race in terms of access to devices and knowledge, the digital divide is multifaceted. In Gunkel's view, in order to continue using the term it should be interrogated for what it has claimed to cover, basing this on the recognition that the phenomenons it has been used to describe all fit under the discussions it has been used to describe. The answer lies in developing a self-reflexivity by questioning "the terms and conditions by which studies of the digital divide define their own mode of questioning" (Gunkel 2003: 517).

Yet simply recognizing the gradation of potential instances of the digital divide does not arbitrate its reliance on a binary structure. Gunkel does not problematize binary thinking, though I find his justification of its necessity to be problematic because he magically equates "Western thought" with "meaningful discourse" (508). Yet the point remains: "In defining others as deficient, one does not simply provide a neutral expression of inequality" (508). By separating what is actually a diversity of levels and modes of connectivity into a dualistic division, the term digital divide misframes its subject.[^1] Perhaps his division of equating 'binary' to 'coherent' and therefore its opposite with 'incoherence' is a knowing example of his suggestion to utilize binary logic to interrogate the limits of the binary division _not_ represented but _implanted_ by the term digital divide.

The third outstanding issue, then, is the continued reliance of the digital divide on technodeterminism. In fact, its invocation bears the weight of accepting by fiat that access to technology automatically yield social, economic, and, presumably even if never evoked, spiritual benefits. Gunkel quickly notes that history does not bear out such an interpretation, nor do statistical surveys of usage patterns on the internet. The telegraph "did not hasten the coming of the kingdom of heaven but supported nationalist aggression and empire-building" (515). Which is true, though I bristled that Enzensberger was listed as a member of those who had faith in the capacity of radio without qualifying his own intense critique of technodeterminism. The potential of radio was never tested to its natural social limits, as the internet to some extent has been. This is, after all, what usage statistics measure. Governments did not trust their citizens with access to a many-to-many communications mechanism and the throbbing logic of capitalism provided the perfect excuse to hand over the reigns to corporations and mandate a mandatory crippling of all radio devices. Given the progress of the corporatization of the internet in tandem with a continued push for copyright control to extend to hardware, Enzensberger's critique remains as valid as ever. Indeed, a 'digital divide' between access to programmable versus non-programmable devices might one day emerge. Gunkel's response to the technodeterministic overtones of the digital divide is similar to his call for self-reflexivity: he calls for questioning "the terms and conditions by which studies of the digital divide define their own mode of questioning." (517)

[^1]: For Gunkel, the binary mode of thinking is not itself a problem, but it seems a remaining issue to me.

# Chun #

Wendy Hui Kyong Chun's 2006 book _Control and Freedom: Power and paranoia in the age of fiber optics_ critiques many undiscussed and undigested assumptions aboout the internet. Writing from an antiracist perspective, Chun establishes a case for examining the ways in which race lies at the core of a utopian interpretation of cyberspace as a 'perfect' commercial realm. Analyzing rhetoric and visual tropes used by corporations in their advertising, Chun demonstrates how "conceiving race as skin-deep has been crucial to conceiving technology as screen deep" (Chun 2006: 129). As computers and the internet became increasingly sold as an "answer" to dilemmas of race and racism, racism becomes naturalized---a frame that declares the presence of intermediary screens as capable of dissolving race has as its logical conclusion that race, then, is only skin deep. Marketing to different races at once generates race as a consumer and pornographic category. The result "effectively conceals individual and institutional responsibility for discrimination" by "positing discrimination as a problem that the discriminated must solve" by gaining access to the internet (132). The internet in this instance (supposedly) allows those 'already marked' to escape _their_ differences, making it their own responsibility to do so.

This side effect is an example of what Chun calls a 'privatization of civil rights': "There is no need any more for battles over discrimination because the Internet can guarantee those rights the state has not been able to provide" (144). Corporations utilize the (often racialized) issue of the digital divide as leverage to position themselves as the answer to the problem. The answer to equality is technology, or specifically, corporate technology. In marketing towards racial groups, such as the computer-owning Latino, corporations do not strive to connect and power those who we think of as marginalized in the terms of a digital divide. Rather the corporations seek to maximize profit by targetting those who can _already afford_ the access. Chun claims the inevitable side product of race as a consumer class is race as a pornographic category. This happens through processes of passing ("where one takes on a marked body rather than an unmarked one" (154)), _pornotroping_ (where those priveleged enough to have flesh, and therefore body, engage in psychologically adopting new flesh), and the closely related 'scenes of subjection.' The last of these is described by Chun: "These scenes produce a form of empathy that obliterates difference: self replaces other, the white sel imagines itself the black beaten slave. The other's degradation thus becomes an opportunity for self-reflection, not an event to which one witnesses and testifies" (136).

Chun's central concern is properly intertwined with issues of race, but it can also be identified on a more abstract level. For Chun the internet represents a means of communication that exposes its users to new vulnerabilities: "Invisibly, the Internet turns every spectator into a spectacle" (130). Information flows two ways, and the corporate processes she highlights are quite interested in collecting the information you must necessarily input in order to get a desired output. For instance, what search term you used or what site you eventually chose to visit (to name only a few of the banal). Chun discusses projects by artist-hackers Mongrel that expose, for instance, the assumed but incorrect 'superagency' of a user by producing "interfaces and content that are provocative---even offensive---in order to reveal the limits of choice, to reveal the fallacy of the all-powerful, race-free user" (164). In contrast to many other books on the internet and new media environments, one of Chun's main goals is to investigate the "ramifications and possibilities of vulnerability and connectivity rather than superagency" (130). From an antiracist perspective this involves _not_ avoiding race, taking it from its whitewashed invisibility and forcing it into the visible. Race must not only be visible, it must be "difficult to consume," arguably a standard attribute of race to begin with (130).

Chun's answer lies in exposing and discussing the ways in which the internet does _not_ enable democracy or provide a race-free utopia, in discussing the vulnerabilities that come as a result of our connections. She mentions the possibility that ideas of "personal" computers serve to obscure the extent to which we give away information about ourselves that we might never consider giving away, if asked for voluntarily rather than automatically cultivated through the two-way nature of the network. In her words, there are "myriad ways in which cooperation is _forced_ on us" (170). I don't read her "solution" (computers that aren't perceived as personal) as a request for State mandates and communal ownership of computer property (she seems much to concerned with privacy and civil rights to necessarily advocate that). However, the question is an interesting one. Certainly the ways in which she problematizes the corporate/governmental tropes of screen-deep differences is an important contribution to one day living in a world that is not so dramatically defined by its racial tensions.


_Here goes the unfortunately omnipresent apology. I'm not sure how it happened but other matters in life have unfortunately taken a foreground position in recent weeks. I hate handing in a half-finished paper, but I'd hate it even more if I felt it contained anything half-assed within it. Thus, it is missing some pieces._

Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. _Control and Freedom: Power and paranoia in the age of fiber optics_. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2006.

Gunkel, David J. "Second thoughts: toward a critique of the digital divide". _new media & society_, 5(4): 499-522. 2003.