# Science \& Technology

  Author:			John Haltiwanger
  Instructor:		Thomas Poell
  Assignment:		Week 4
  Date:				24 February 2010


# Reaction to Turner

Fred Turner's text deals primarily with the question of 'digital utopianism.' Where did the sentiment, so common in the 1990s, that computers represented a new paradigm of digitally-enabled equality, personal liberation, and utopia actually come from? Turner's answer lies in the social force that is one Stewart Brand, founder of the _Whole Earth Catalog_ and integral component of a vast number of overlapping social networks. As a professor of Communications, his focus on Brand's social networking techniques (extrapolated from the military-academic-industrial complex's embrace of cybernetic theory) and the influence of _Wired_ specifically in shaping the discourse and understandings of PCs in the 1990s make sense---Brand, if nothing else, has pushed the potentials of "communication" and demonstrated something remarkably like a successful propaganda campaign. However, as I will elaborate, there are flaws with this attribution, some of which may result from Turner's non-technical background.

Inasmuch as Turner's text concerns the question of how computers came to be seen as tools of personal liberation, his sole-minded focus on the networks of Stewart Brand overplays their importance. Steven Levy clearly outlined a moral ethic to which hackers self-subscribed in his 1984 book _Hackers_ (Levy 1984,1994). This morality issues forth declarations of universal access to computers and information and a judgment system that foreclosed issues of race, gender, age, and social position in favor of evaluating fellow hackers based only on code. These positions have clear relations to (my understanding of) American New Left ideology, including a predisposition for some degree of socialism. 

The origins of the first commercially successful PC (Apple I) in the activities of Steve Wozniak are intrinsically tied to his connections to the hackers in the Homebrew Computing Club. Many in this group of hackers saw communal[^1] development of microcomputers as a moral imperative, a transition to individual access to computers that likely would never come from the corporate world. Why would they ever choose to give up their powerful positions as dominating patriarchs in a world of computer access defined by its resemblance to a priest class? In fact, when Hewlett Packard decided whether HP should exercise its rights over the Apple I (which Wozniak had developed while working a summer job at the company), it waived its option due to the sheer incomprehensibility its corporate mind faced at the concept of an average individual ever wanting their own computer. These hackers knew the potential of the microcomputer as a tool and endeavored to ensure it came into existence, yet the relationships of hackers to machines is complex and probably represent unique cross-liberations. The hacker hacks often for the sheer thrill---in other words, the universal liberation known as a high.[^2] Couldn't the hacking be said to liberate the computer by equipping it with new modes of potential? Wasn't Wozniak's Apple I a liberational watershed for all involved? The man gets some money and a job hacking, the people get PCs, and the microcomputer begins its reorientation of entire societies. It seems to me that isolating a liberational view of computers into the result of Stewart Brand's networking seems exclusionary to the point of reinforcing Brand's legacy and legitimizing his libertarian approach. These standpoints are of course valid, so long as they are not presented in the absence of other clear lineages of liberational moralities that stand to weaken an argument that traces the popular liberatory view of computers to Brand and his networks.[^3] In Brand's own words, "No other group that I know of has set out to liberate a technology and succeeded" (Levy 1994: 356).

This is not to undermine the importance of Turner's elucidation of the effects that Brand's cybernetically inspired networks _did_ have. Stewart Brand and associates (the SBAA?) truly did see the utility potential of the tools at their disposal. Deploying cybernetic theory to entrepeneurship enabled the social networks that would one day spread _a particular form of_ computer liberation ideology. Turner's frequent invocation of LSD as a technology for communal organization (in the hands of the New Communalists) and personal liberation (in general) does directly mirror the rhetoric, and even experience, of the early Internet era. There are also important unexplored parallels in the criminalization of LSD and file sharing. At their most idealistic, both enable new and unique social potentials and understandings. Criminalized, these potentials are marginalized and co-opted into a caricature of its now socially illegitimate (taboo and dangerous) technology.

By demonstrating that Brand, et al., were instrumental in steering and shaping the language, and thus the conceptual framings, of the Internet's Big Bang, Turner exposes them as the agents of the deregulation that has resulted in oligolopic telecom assemblage ruling the wires. Forced line-sharing, also known as the principle of carrier neutrality, is the main driving force behind Japan's lead in broadband connectivity and is a model that has been successfully replicated anywhere that is not too corrupt, or just plain stupid, to try. Yochai Benkler identifies it as the most effective, yet least politically likely, means to ensure network neutrality in the United States (Benkler 2005). This clearly illustrates that when Turner warns information workers that if they "buy into the notion that computers and the network economy will bring about a peer-to-peer utopia, as many still do, they run the risk of perpetuating the forms of suffering and exclusion that plagued the back-to-the-landers," he is in fact more right than he may even know (Turner 2006: 257). It certainly echoes Enzensberger's assertion that a techno-determinism that relies on machines and _the simple existence of those machines_ to provide paths to liberation will lead to no liberation at all. The path must be blazed to freedom before those in control can lay concrete slabs in the way. It is hackers, not Brand's networks, who achieved this trailblazing and thus unlocked the microcomputer for the masses. Brand may have been instrumental in publicizing (his own particular vision of) digital utopianism, but his involvment in constructing the core architecture to support that vision is minimal to the extreme.  

The libertarian, "market is nature" viewpoint that Brand embeds in his networking continues to dominate not only the language of technology and its potential, but the entire discourse underpinning America's economy today, with _universally similar results as those Turner warns based on the elitist communard experience_. Turner's narration of the role in which Brand, et al. plays in shaping these social conceptions not only provides solid entities and decisions with which to critique the Californian Ideology, it also illuminates social networking techniques based on cybernetic theory that could prove useful in countering that ideology.



[^1]: Yet also very individual at the same time, in the grand tradition of prestige competition and capitalist resource allocation (some could afford more components / newer kits than others). An Altair kit was in the mail to an HBCC member at the time of the first meeting, for instance.
[^2]: If there is a moral component, it can be easily exercised by licensing in a morally accordant format and, likely, through the nature and utility (scope) of the hack. 
[^3]: Brand once gave away 20,000 dollars to an audience and told them to decide who should be its recipient. Fred Moore, an early member of the then-embryonic HBCC, held a moral stance against money and spent the entire night campaigning against even having a vote about voting about the money, trying to convince people to organize and stay in touch as a network, and passing around a petition stating "We feel the union of people here tonight is more important than money, a greater resource." In the end, the last of the audience gave the money to Moore. I find this an interesting contrast to Brand's apparrent approach to social networking (Levy 1994: 156-7).

# Reactions to Beck / Latour #

Ulrich Beck's _World at Risk_ attempts to explain a new theory of sociology, or at least a new sociological understanding, based on the idea that a new stage of modernity has arrived (Beck 2009). This new stage of modernity is defined by widespread risks that are increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to assess in terms of responsibility. While the first era of modernity is defined by its ignorance of the risks it was generating, the second era knows of the risks and therefore seeks to incorporate them (or not) into its understanding and practice. 

A significant countervailing force to this trend of actully managing risks instead of skirting blame and responsibility lies in what Beck calls 'relations of definition.' Similar to Marx's 'relations of domination,' Beck's explication of these relations demonstrates that the capacity to define a thing (here, risk) allows control over society's understanding of that thing. As the degree and scope of pollution increases, the likelihood for a polluter to be punished decreases (30). Questions of who determines what a risk is, and what to do about it, are answered through these relations of definition (or _not_ answered, as the case may increasingly be). 

To be perfectly honest, the selections of Beck did not give me a good sense _at all_ of what the man is promoting. That the world is risky? Derrick Jensen's _Endgame_ provides a much more robust articulation of the actual problems facing it. That the hope lies in sub-politics, a la his case study of a 1995 Greenpeace action? (96) The text bounces around with the action of a medicine ball, weighed down by its cumbersome associations with the 'social' and 'modernity.' As Latour rebuts gracefully, the former is invalid and the latter impossibly hard to define. Reading Latour's response brought some of Beck's thinking to light, but much of that I failed to see in the readings from _World at Risk_.

For Latour, the proof is in the pudding. When asked to look into Beck's "reflexive modernity," which he mercifully calls re-modernization, Latour approaches with his characteristic proof-focused analysis (Latour 2003). By comparing the relative approaches for proving 're-modernization' and ANT, Latour slowly eviscerates Beck's argument.[^4] For ANT (and, specifically, Latour's own persepctive), the initial step would be to prove that a perspective shift had occurred in the understanding and appreciation of risks---_because modernity has never accurately described itself_, the mere act of describing itself differently would prove a) there never was an acceptable vision of risk in modernity, and b) that a new master narrative had been introduced. For 're-modernization' the task is to prove that such a second stage of modernity actually incorporates "very different characteristics" (39). In other words, "for Beck and his group the proofs have to be in the _substance_ of the phenomena they study, for me only in the _collective interpretation_ given to phenomena which, all along, have never been modern" (39). The difference in the two approaches is quite large---ANT's reliance on an _actual litmus_ for demonstrating the accuracy of a theory allows it to easily stomp on Beck's social rhetoric. In fact, Latour uses the litmuses for both approaches to show the extensive work necessary _to even test_ Beck's assertions. Ultimately Latour does not condemn Beck's 're-modernization' but rather declares it a potential tool in shaping our understanding and approach _going forward_. "Re-modernization might not descrie what has already happened, but it can offer a powerful lever to make new things happen" (46).

_Note: I would like to take this moment to say that I am not happy with this paper. While I think my critique of Turner is not only biting, but relevant, I have to say that I a) did not understand or appreciate Beck, and b) mis-managed time and did not end up reading Marres. If Marres' work actually connected with my case study, it would be the first to do so non-tangentially, thus the absence of the case study here as well. Next week I will get this timing right or die trying._

[^4]: I'd like to reiterate that I did _not_ necessarily see this argument in the text we read. 

# Bibliography #

Beck, Ulrich. _World at Risk_. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2009. 24-46 (chapter 2), 81-108 (chapter 5).

Benkler, Yochai. _The Wealth of Networks_. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006.

Latour, Bruno. "Is _Re_-modernization Occurring--And If So, How to Prove It? A Commentary on Ulrich Beck." _Theory, Culture, & Society: Explorations in Critical Social Science_, 20, no. 2 (2003): 35-48.

Levy, Steven. _Hackers: Heros of the computer revolution_.  New York: Dell Publications, 1994. Originally published 1984. 

Turner, Fred. _From Counterculture to Cyberculture_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 2006. 1-9 (Introduction), 175-262 (chapters: 6-8).
