# *Hackers* After 25 Moore Years: Steven Levy Returns to an Invisible Topic #

A personal chord was struck when Steven Levy mentions the impact of his 1984 book *Hackers: Heroes of the computer revolution* on subsequent generations of computer enthusiasts. Following the rabbit hole of microcomputer history from TNT's made-for-cable movie *Pirates of the Silicon Valley* to *Fire in the Valley*, the book upon which that movie was based, the book I found sitting on the table at the Mad Hatter's banquet was *Hackers*. Twelve years later the impact of these early hackers has pervaded the landscape of modern Western life. The excitement and enthusiasm that surrounded the Homebrew Computing Club gave rise to the Steve Wozniak's Apple I. Still considered an incredible hack of hardware, Wozniak's Apple I prototype was released by HP from their first-owner rights due to a distinctly corporate lack of insight. In the words of that event in the *Pirates* script, "What would an average person want with a computer?"

Despite being the author who first codified the [Hacker Ethic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hacker_ethic), Levy seems ready to throw some of its core tenets under the bus as he notes "Indeed, it was only by discarding key aspects of the hacker ethic that was able to embrace computing’s commercial potential and bring it to the masses. Pure hackers encouraged anyone to copy, examine, and improve any piece of code. But Gates insisted that software was no different from other intellectual property and that copying a digital product was just as illegal as swiping a shirt from Kmart." Yet the entire point of *Hackers* seemed to be the documentation of some kind of nascent human impulse for computation. Viewed through that lens, granting Bill Gates the position of bringing computing "to the masses" would be improperly mapping a historical figure onto an inevitable phenomenon. Gates, for his part, nicely implements a blindered view of the importance of intellectual property rights: "Gates puts the argument in perspective by pointing out that centuries ago, European publishers printed American writers’ works without compensation. 'Benjamin Franklin was so ripped off — he could have written exactly what I wrote in that letter,' he says." It is typically American to point the finger at European violations of IP when in fact the entire industrialization of the United States occurred through wanton disregard for European patents on industrial designs. And, for the record Bill, Franklin never wrote that letter. Would he really have felt "ripped off" as he tore bodices off of French courtiers? If he had, it's not an opinion he is famous for. Meanwhile, the cognitive capitalists in USA conveniently ignore the roots of not only "American" industry but also the importance of 18th century pirates in the fomenting of the revolution in the first place.

Indeed, Levy continuously equates success with public visibility and personal cash flow. Commercialization has resulted in the transformation of the popular conception of hackers from antisocialites who turn to computers to avoid human contact into "moguls in the making." 