# Threads (Introduction) #

There are several threads that I perceive as necessary for the construction of a proper report on the subject. The first is the theoretical geneology of the medium. What claims have been made about the _composition_ of mediums? The seond thread involves interrogating these claims in light of the nature of generative processes. What place do discussions of mediums and medium-specificty have in the realms of morphic generativity? The third thread revolves around documenting the historical dimensions of electronic typesetting. What currents flow through the development of the typesetting tools found today in the world of FLoSS? 

The importance of this question lies in the mercurial context of open source, and even computing in general, in which time is spent on coding software rather than writing history. Constructing a historical record is thus an attempt to contribute this relatively invisible undercurrent to the scholarly record of new media in hope of providing a template for further introspection in other fields of software evolution.

The fourth thread involves direct integration of generative processes in a typesetting workflow composed of FLoSS softwares. Through this activity I hope to materially instantiate a zone for discursive interplay between new media theory and real-world typographic engineering. Does theory offer methods or tools useful for interpreting the dynamics of typographic workflows, especially as they involve generative processes? One obvious toolis a vocabulary through which theory can attempt to describe and critique the software's capacities and interactions. This thread of the project aims to deliver exactly that.
